MOLESWOKTH, Sir William (1810-1855), the eighth
baronet, was born in London, 23d May 1810, and succeeded
to the extensive family estates in Devon and Cornwall in
1823. On the passing of the Reform Act of 1832 he was re-
turned to parliament, though only twenty-two years old, for
the eastern division of the county of Cornwall, to support the
ministry of Lord Grey. For some time he took little part
in the debates of the House of Commons; but in April 1835
he founded, in conjunction with Mr. Roebuck, the London,
Review, as an organ of the politicians known to the world
as "Philosophic Radicals." After the publication of two
volumes he purchased the Westminster Review, and for some
time the united magazines were edited by him and J. S.
Mill. From 1837 to 1841 Sir William Molesworth sat for
the borough of Leeds, and during those years acquired con-
siderable influence in the House of Commons by his speeches
and by his tact in presiding over the select committee on
Transportation. From 1841 to 1845 he remained in private
life, occupying his leisure time in editing the works in Latin
and English of Thomas Hobbes of Malmesbury, a recreation
which cost him no less than £6000. In the latter year he




1 By internal kinetic energy is meant the kinetic energy of motion
of the parts of the molecule relatively to one another, in contradis-
tinction to the kinetic energy of motion of the molecule as a whole.




was returned for the borough of Southwark, and retained
that seat until his death. On his return to parliament he
devoted special attention to the condition of the colonies,
and delivered many speeches in favour of a reduction in
colonial expenditure and on their better administration.
His arguments on these questions changed the opinions of
the members of the House of Commons; and the criticisms
of the daily press, aided by the printing of his speeches, led
to the gradual acceptance of his views by the electors at
large. It was not, however, until many years afterwards that
he was allowed full opportunity for working out the difficult
problems connected with the government of Great Britain.
Office was conferred upon him in December 1852 by Lord
Aberdeen, but it was the minor post of directing the public
improvements and crown lands of his own country, and the
chief work by which his name was brought into prominence
at this time was the construction of the new Westminster
Bridge. At last, in July 1855, he was called to preside
over the Colonial Office, but unfortunately its duties were
no sooner entrusted to his care than he was cut off by
death (22d October 1855), to the universal regret of his
countrymen, for he had lived down the animosities of his
youth, and had attracted to himself the sympathies of
all thoughtful men. The influence which his views had
acquired, and still retain, may be judged from the fact that
in 1878 the delegates of the Transvaal Government put
forward, as the chief argument for the withdrawal of the
English from the Transvaal, the substance of his speech on
the abandonment of the Orange River Territory in 1854.


A full pedigree of the Molesworth family is printed in Sir John
Maelean's Trigg Minor, vol. i.; the titles of his speeches and works


2 It may be urged that the cleavage of crystals indicates that they
possess a molecular structure, but a tactical or pattern-like arrangement
of atoms may easily be supposed to present planes of easier separation,
without the assumption of really independent molecules.







OCR Output









624 M O L — M O L




maybe found in the Bibl. Cornubiensis, vols. i. and iii. The name of
Sir William Molesworth is frequently mentioned in the biographies
of Mil], Cobden, Carlyle, Grote, and Panizzi.