NORTHCOTE, James (1746-1831), historical and por-
trait painter, was born at Plymouth on the 2 2d October
1746. Though he early showed an inclination for art, Lis
father, a poor watchmaker of tho town, insisted that he
should be bound with himself for an apprenticeship of
seven years. During his spare hours the boy was dili-
gent with brush and pencil, and on the expiry of tho term,
in 1769, he started as a portrait painter. Four years
later he went to London, and was admitted as a pupil into
the studio and house of Reynolds, who had been the object
of his warmest admiration from early boyhood. At the
same time he studied from the round and the life in the
Academy schools, making, it would seem, rather slow pro
gresa in the technical processes of art. In 1775 he left
Reynolds, and about two years later, having acquired the
requisite funds by portrait-painting in Devonshire, he
set out for Italy. There ho remained for three years, study-
ing the portraits of Titian, looking, as he tells us, twice
at Michelangelo for every time he looked at Raphael, and
forming the resolution that in the futare he would paint
portraits for bread and historical subjects for fame. On
his return to England he revisited his native county, and
then settled in London, whero Opie and Fuseli were his
rivals. He was elected associate of tho Academy in 1786,
and full academician in the following spring. The Young
Princes murdered in tho Tower, his firRt important histori-
cal work, dates from 1786, and it was followed by the
Burial of the Princes in the Tower, both paintings, along
with seven others, being executed for the Shakespeare
gallery of Alderman Boydell. The Death of Wat Tyler,
now in the Guildhall, was exhibited in 1787; and shortly
afterwards Northcote began a set of ten subjects, entitled
tho Modest Girl and the Wanton, which were completed
and engraved in 1796. They were suggested by tho
Pamela of Richardson and the Idle and Industrious
Apprentices of Hogarth,—a painter for whom Northcote
professed little admiration. The series was popular at the
time, but neither in truth of dramatic conception nor in
technical qualities does it approach the parallel works of
tho older master. Among the productions of Northcote'a
later years are the Entombment and the Agony in tho
Garden, besides many portraits, and several animal sub-
jects, like the Leopards, the Dog and Heron, and the
Lion, which were more successful than the artist's efforts







OCR Output









N O R — N O R 563




in the higher departments of art, as was indicated by
Fuseli's caustic remark on examining the Angel opposing
Balaam—" Northcote, you are an angel at an ass, but an
ass at an angeL" The works of the artist number about
two thousand. By unwearied diligence, combined with
extreme frugality, he was enabled to accumulate, before
his death on 13th July 1831, a fortune of £40,000.


Hia works possess a certain dignity, and they tell their story
clearly; bnt they are marred by defective drawing and dull colour-
ing, and by the gross anachronisms and inconsistencies in costume
common to the nistorical painters of the period. Northcote was
omulous of famo as an author, and his first essays in literature were
contributions to The Artist, edited by Mr Prince Hoare. In 1813
he embodied his recollections of hia old roaster in a Life of Reynolds,
His FabUs—the first series published in 1828, the second posthu-
mously in 1833—were illustrated with woodcuts by Harvey from
Northcote's own designs. In the production of his Lift of Titian,
his last work, which appeared in 1830, he was assisted by William
Hazlitt, who previously, in 1826, had given to the public in the
Hew Monthly Magazine his recollections of Northcote's pungent and
cynical "conversations," the bitter personalities of winch caused
much trouble to the painter and his friends.