OFFENBACH, Jacques (1819-1880), the inventor of
the latest form of the modern opera bouffe, was born at
Cologne, of Jewish parents, 21st June 1819. His talent
for music was developed at a very early age; and in
1833 he was sent to Paris to study the violoncello at
the conservatoire, where, under the care of Professor
Vaslin, he became a fairly good performer, notwithstand-
ing his utter want of that earnestness which alone can
make a true artist. In 1834 he was admitted into the
orchestra of the Opera Comique as a "ripieno" violon-
cellist; and here his unrivalled tact and natural quickness
of perception enabled him to acquire an amount of experi-





ence which he was not slow to turn to profitable account.
His next appointment was that of conductor at the The£t>e
Francais, where, in 1848, he made his first success as a com-
poser in the " Chanson de Fortunio," in Alfred da Musset's
play Le Chandelier. From this time forward his life be-
came a ceaseless struggle for the attainment of popularity.
His power of production was inexhaustible; and, since he
was ready to repeat himself without scruple whenever it
answered his purpose to do so, tlie demand upon his ideas
was invariably met with a rapidity which fairly astonished
both theatrical managers and tile general public. His
first complete work, Pepito, was produced at the Opera
Comique in 1853. This was soon followed by a crowd of
dramatic trifles, which daily gained in favour with Parisian
audiences, and eventually effected a complete revolution
in the popular taste of the period. Encouraged by these
early successes, Offenbach now boldly undertook the deli-
cate task of entirely remodelling both the form and the
style of the light-musical pieces which have so long been
welcomed with acclamation by the frequenters of the
smaller theatres in Paris. With this purpose in view he
obtained a lease of the Theatre Comte in the Passage
Choiseul, re-opened it under the title of the Bouffe*
Parisiens, and night after night attracted crowded
audiences by a succession of brilliant trifles which never
failed to make their mark, though not one of them pos-
sessed substance enough to enable it to retain its vitality
after the appearance of its successor upon the stage. Be-
ginning with Let Deux Aveuglet and Le Yioloneux, the
series was continued with almost unexampled rapidity,
until, in 1867—twelve years after the opening of the
theatre—its triumph culminated in La Grande Duchetst
de Geroletein, perhaps the most popular opera bouffe that
ever was written, not excepting even his Orphee aux Enfert,
produced in 1858. From this time forward the success of
Offenbach's pieces became an absolute certainty. He never
failed. Without a trace of true genius or a thought of re-
verence for art, he possessed a talent so brilliant and a
facility of invention so prolific that, in place of following
the public taste, as he had so cleverly done at the outset
of his career, he was able to lead it whither he would;
and the new form of opera bouffe, which he had gradually
endowed with as much consistency as it was capable of
assuming, was accepted as the only one worth cultivating.
That it should live is simply impossible. It has, indeed,
found imitators in Lecocq and other aspirants of a younger
generation; and some of these have attained successes
not much less brilliant than those of Offenbach himself.
But to be really enduring an art-form must be based
upon some stronger principle than a mere desire for the
attainment of popular favour; and so far is this from
being the case with what is now universally accepted as
the genuine opera bouffe that it would be impossible to
strain the point so far as to admit its connexion with
any form of art whatever. But no artistic consideration
dimmed the brilliancy of Offenbach's success. His theatre
continued to flourish, and his works found their way to
every town in Europe in which a theatre existed. Their
want of refinement formed no obstacle to their popularity,
and perhaps even contributed to it. In twenty-five years
he produced no less than sixty-nine complete dramatic
works, some of which were in three or even in four acts.
Among the latest of these were Le Docteur Ox, founded
on a story by Jules Verne, and La Boite au Latt, both
produced in 1877, and, though not among his brightest
triumphs, sufficiently successful to show that the reign of
his popularity has not yet come to an end. Offenbach
died in 1880.