OTIS, Jamb (1724-1783), was born at Barnstable,
Massachusetts, U.S., on February 5, 1724 (o.s.). Ho
graduated with honours at Harvard in 1743, and for a year
«two afterwards devoted himself to the study of literature
htfore reading law. He had been a dozen years at the bar,
and had risen to professional distinction, when in 1760 ho




published a Rudiment! of Latin Prosody, a book long ago
out of print as well as out of date, but of authority in its
time. He wrote also a similar treatise upon Greek prosody;
but that was never published, because, as he said, there was
not a fount of Greek letters in the country, nor, if there
were, a printer who could have set it up. These, however,
were his first and last works upon any other subject than
politics. As the long war between Great Britain and
France drew towards its close in 1762, measures were taken
to enforce anew, in the British colonies in America, the
commercial laws which had been in a measure lost sight
of. The relaxation had taught the colonists that the
burden wa3 heavier than they thought when they bent
beneath it; now the war had given them confidence in their
own power, and the time had come, therefore, when
resistance was inevitable. A trade with tho West Indies
in colonial vessels had been specially developed. This was
in violation of tho navigation laws, and to break it up an
order in council was sent from England in 1760 directing
the issue of writs of assistance; which would authorize tho
custom-officers to enter any man's house on suspicion of
concealment of smuggled goods. The legality of a mcasuro
which would put so dangerous a power into the hands of
irresponsible men was questioned, and the superior court
consented to hear argument. Otis was a law-officer under
the crown, and it was his duty to appear on behalf of the
Government. He refused, resigned his office, and appeared
for the people against the issuo of the writs. His plea
was profound for its legal lore, fearless in its assertion of
the rights of colonial Englishmen, and so fervid in its
eloquence that it was said he " was a flame of fire."
Thoagh it failed to convince a court where tho lieutenant-
governor, Hutchinson, eat as chief justice, Oti3 was from
that moment a man of mark. John- Adams, who heard has,
said, " American independence was then and there born."
The young orator waa soon afterwards unanimously elected
a representative from Boston to tho Colonial Assembly.
To that position ho waa re-elected nearly ovory year of the
remaining active years of his life, serving there with his
father, who was usually a member, and often speaker, of
that body. Of most of the important state papers addressed
to the colonies to enlist them in the common cause, or sent
to the Government in England to uphold the rights or set
forth the grievances of the colonists, the younger Otis waa
the author. His influence at home in controlling and
directing the movement of events which led to the revolution
was universally felt and acknowledged; and abroad no
American was so frequently quoted, denounced, or applauded
in parliament and the English press, as the recognized head
and chief of the rebellious spirit of tho colonies.1 In 1765
Massachusetts sent him as one of her representatives to the
first Continental Congress, where he was a conspicuous
figure. Four years later his brilliant public career waa
brought to a close. In consequence of a newspaper con-
troversy with some Tory office-holders in Boston, he waa
attacked in a darkened room in a public coffee-house by a
dozen men, and wounded by a blow upon the head from
which he never recovered. His health gave way, and he
was subject to frequent attacks of insanity. Ho was killed
by lightning on the 23d May 1783.


A biography of Otis by William Tudor appeared In 1823; and a
much briefer one, by Francis Bowen, in 1844.


1 Tho political writings of Otis were chiefly controversial, and were
published in the Boston newspapers. His more important pamphlets
wero A Vindication of tho Conduct of tho Boast of Representative)
of the Province of Massachusetts Bay, published in-1763; The Righte
of the British Colonics Asserted and Proved, 1764; A Vindication of
the British Colonics against the Aspersions of the Halifax Gentleman,
in his Letter to a Rhode Island Friend,—a letter known at tho timo as
tho " Halifax Libel," 1705; Considerations on Behalf cf the Colonists
in a Letter to a ifoblc Lord, published in England the same year.