PALLAS, Peteb Simon (1741-1811), naturalist and
traveller, was born in Berlin, September 22, 1741, the son
of Simon Pallas, surgeon in the Prussian army, and pro-
fessor of surgery in Berlin. Pallas was carefully educated
by his father, being accustomed from boyhood to the use
of several languages, among them English and French.
He was intended for the medical profession, and his
progress was such that in 1758 he lectured publicly on
anatomy. PaUaa studied at the universities of Berlin,
Halle, Gottingen, and Leyden. He early displayed a
strong leaning towards natural history investigations,
which by the time he reached manhood almost monopolized
his attention. In 1761 he came to England, where he
spent a year, devoting himself to a thorough study of the
collections he found there, and to a geological investiga-
tion of part of the English coast; and at the age of
twenty-three he was elected a foreign member of the Royal
Society. Pallas spent some time in Holland, where he
found ample scope for investigation in his special subjects,
the results of which appeared at the Hague in 1766 in
his Elenchus Zooph.ytorv.rn and Miscellanea Zoologiea, and
in 1767-1804 in his well-known Spicilegia Zoologiea
(Berlin). In 1768 he gladly accepted the invitation of the
empress Catherine to fill the professorship of natural
history in the Imperial Academy of Science, St Petersburg,
and from that time until within a year of his death his
home was in Russia. The great event of his life, and
that by which he will be permanently remembered, was
the expedition through Russia and Siberia in 1768-74, in
which he acted as naturalist, in company with Falk,
Lepechen, and Guldenstadt, the immediate object being
the observation of the transit of Venus in 1769. In this
leisurely journey Pallas went by Kasan to the Caspian,




spent some time among the Calmucks, crossed the Uralj
to Tobolsk, visited the Altai Mountains, traced the Irtish
to Kolyvan, went on to Tomsk and the Yenissei, crossed
Lake Baikal, and extended his journey to the frontiers of
China. Few explorations have been so fruitful as this
six years' journey. Pallas's collections included all depart-
ments of natural history, and his observations extended to
every point of interest in the region traversed and its
inhabitants. The leading results were given in his Rosen
durch verschiedene Provimen dee Russischen Reich* (3 vols.
4to, St Petersburg, 1771-76), richly illustrated with
coloured plates, A French translation in 1788-93, in 8
vols., with 9 vols, of plates, contained, in addition to the
narrative, the natural history results of the expedition; r.i. i
an English translation in three volumes appeared in 1812.
As special results of this great journey may be mentioned
Sammlungcn historitcher Nachrichten ilber die Mongolischm
Volkerschaften (2 vols. 4to, St Petersburg, 1776-1802);
Nova Species Quadrupedvm, 1778-79; Pallas's con-
tributions to the dictionary of languages of the Russian
empire, 1786-89; lames Insectorum, prsesertim Rossis
Siberueque peculiarium, 1781—1806; Zoographia Rosso-
Asiatica (3 vols., 1831); besides many special papers
in the Transactions of the academies of St Petersburg and
Berlin. The empress bought Pallas's natural history collec-
tions for 20,000 roubles, 5000 more than he asked for
them, and allowed him to keep them for life. He spent a
considerable time in 1793-94 in visiting the southern pro-
vinces of Russia, and was so greatly taken with the Crimea
that he determined to take up his residence there. The
empress gave him a large estate at Simpheropol, and
10,000 roubles to assist in equipping a house. Though dis-
appointed with the Crimea as a place of residence, Pallas
continued to live there, devoted to constant research,
especially in botany, till the death of his second wife in
1810, when he removed to Berlin, where he died September
8, 1811'. The results of his journey in southern Russia were
given in his Bemerkungcn auf einer Reise durch die siid-
lichen Statthalterschaften des RUssisrhen Reich* (Leipsic,
1799-1801; English translation by Blagdon, vols. 5-8 of
Modern Discoveries, 1802, and another in 2 vols., 1812).
Pali, s also edited and contributed to Neue Nordiseke
BeUrage zur physikalischcn Erd- und Volkerbesehreibung,
Naturgeeckichte, und Oetonomie (1781-96), published Jllus-
trationes Plantarum imperfecte vel nondum cognitarum
(Leipsic, 1803), and contributed to Buffon's Natural
History a paper on the formation of mountains, and to the
Transactions of various learned societies a great number of
special papers.


The solid value and great extent of Pallas's contributions to
natural science have been long admitted; his name is inseparably
associated with the geography (in its varied branches) of Siberia
and a large part of European Russia. That he had a marked
influence on the progress of zoology there is no doubt; some
authorities even hold that he changed the face of tho science; while
his geological investigations and speculations, if they did not
revolutionize the young science (as has been maintained), greatly
helped its progress, though not in any sense brilliant either as
an investigator or as a writer, Pallas is certainly one of the most
important figures in the science of the latter half of the ISth
century.


See the Essay of RadolphI In the Traniattionl of the Berlin Academy for
1813; Cnrier'e Elogo In his Recur 11 del tloaei Hietoriava, vol. 11.; and tee Life
In Jardlne'e Jfaturaliets' Library, vol. It., Edln'., IMS,