PASQUIER, ETIENNE (1529-1615), one of the glories
of the French bar, and one of not the least remarkable
men of letters of the 16th century, was born at Paris on
the 7th June 1529 by his own account, according to others
a year earlier. Nothing is known of his family, and hardly
anything of his youth, but he seems to have inherited a
small property at Châtelet in the district of Brie. He
certainly studied law early, and in 1547 was a pupil of
the famous Cujas at Toulouse. Thence, like many of his
contemporaries, he went to finish his studies in Italy. He
was called to the Paris bar in November 1549, having not
yet (or at most barely) reached his majority. He practised
diligently and with success, .but by no means neglected
literature. Some of his work both at this time and later is
light and almost frivolous. A treatise on love, the Mono-
¡iliilf, appeared in 1554, and not a few similar publica-
tions followed it, one of them, the Ordonnances d'Amour,
being somewhat Rabelaisian in character. Fasquier, how-
ever, though not a stoic, was a man of perfectly regular
life, and he married early ; his wife, who was of his own
age, affluent, and, it is said, handsome, being a widow for
whom he had gained a lawsuit. The next year he had
the misfortune to eat some poisonous mushrooms and very
nearly died of them ; indeed he did not recover fully for
two years. This lost him his practice for the time, and
he again betook himself to general literature, publishing
in 1560 the first book of his great work the Rechercha de
la France. Before very long, however, clients once more
came to him, and in 1565, when he was thirty^seven, his
fame was established by a great speech still extant, in
which he pleaded the cause of the university of Paris
against the Jesuits, and won it He was thenceforward
constantly employed in the most important cases of the
day, and his speeches, many of which we possess, displayed
a polished eloquence which was new in his time. But he
did not neglect general literature, pursuing the Rechercha
steadily, and publishing from time to time much miscellan-
eous work. His literary and his legal occupations coin-
cided in a curious fashion at the. Grands Jours of Poitiers
in 1579. These (hand Jours (an institution which fell
into desuetude at the end of the 17 th. century, with bad
effects on the social and political welfare of the French
provinces) were a kind of irregular assize in which a com-
mission of the parlement of Paris, selected and despatched
at short notice by the king, had full power to hear and
determine all causes, especially those in which seignorial
rights had been abused. At the Grands Jours of Poitiers
of the date mentioned, and at those of Trayes in 1583,
Pasquier officiated; and each occasion has left a curious
literary memorial of the kind of high jinks with which he
and his colleagues relieved their graver duties. The Poitiers
work was the celebrated collection of poems on a flea, of
which English readers may find a full account in Southey's
Doctor. Up to this time Pasquier had held no regular
office except the lieutenant-generalship of Cognac, where
his wife had property ; but in 1635 Henry III. made him
advocate-general at the Paris Cours des Comptes, an
important body having political as well as financial and
legal functions. Pasquier distinguished himself here







OCR Output









P A 'S — P A S 341




particularly by opposing, sometimes successfully, the mis-
chievous system of selling hereditary places and offices,
which more perhaps than any single thing was the curse of
the older French monarchy. He was present at the famous
States of Blois, where Guise was assassinated, and he met
Montaigne there. The civil wars brought him much
personal sorrow. His wife and children had remained in
Paria much harassed by the Leaguers ; Madame Pasquier
was even imprisoned, and, though she regained her liberty,
sho died shortly afterwards, in 1590. Her youngest son
was killed fighting on the royalist side the year before.
For some years Pasquier lived at Tours, working steadily at
his great book, but he returned to Paris in Henry IV.'s
train on the 22d March 1594. He continued until 1604
at his work in the Chambre des Comptes ; then he retired.
He survived this retirement more than ten years, produc-
ing much literary work, and died after a few hours' illness
oo September 1, 1615, at the age of at least eighty-six.


In so V>ng and so laborious a life Pasquier's work was naturally
considerable, and it lias never been fully collected or indeed printed.
The standard edition is tliat of Amsterdam, 1723, 2 vols, folio.
But for ordinary nadcri the selections of ?. Léon Feugère, pub-
lished at Paris in z voL *vo, 1849, with an elaborate introduction,
are most accessible. As a poet, though ???? far from contemptible,
Fasquier is chiefly interesting as a minor member of tho Pléiade
movement. As a prose writer he is of much more account. The
three chief divisions of his prose work arc his Rechercha, his letters,
and his professional speeches. All are of much value as important
documents in the history of the progress of French style. The
Rechercha and the letters have a value independent of this. Tho
letters are of much biographical inteiest and historical importance,
and the Recherches contain iu a somewhat miscellaneous fashion
invaluable information ou a vast variety of subjects, literary,
political, antiquarian, and other.