PEABODY, GEORGE (1795-1869), philanthropist, was
descended from an old yeoman family of Hertfordshire,
England, named Pabody or Pebody, who, six generations
beicro hb birth, had emigrated to New England. He was
born at Danvcrs (now Pcabody), Massachusetts, 18th
February 1795. The only regular education he received
was at the district school, and when only eleven years of
age ho became apprentice at a grocery store. At the end
of four years he became assistant to his brother, who kept
a dry goods shop, and a year afterwards, on the shop being
burned, to his uncle, who had a business in George Town,
District of Columbia. After serving as a volunteer at Fort
^\''a??urton in tho short war bctv/ccn Great Britain and
the United Ststca in Ib 12, he became partner with Elisha
Riggs in a dry goods store, Riggs furnishing tho capital,
while Peabody had the practical management. As bagman
he travelled through the western wilds of New York and
Pennsylvania and the plantations of Maryland and Vir-
ginia. Through his energy and skill tho business increased
with astounding rapidity, and on the retirement of Riggs
about Io30 Pcabody found himself at the head of one
of the largest mercantile concerns in the world. About
1837 ho established himself in London ?? merchant and
money-broker at Wanford Court, City, and in 1843 he
withdrew from the concern in America, It is, however,
as a sagacious and generous philanthropist that Peabody
has made his name a household word. While holding
aloof from the strife of politics in the United States, ho
was ready to give his native country tho benefit of his
business skill and the aid of 1m wealth in its financial
difficulties. The number of his great benefactions to
public objects is too great for bare mention here. It must
suffice to name among tho more important a gift of
£25,000 for educational purposes at Dan vers; of ¿£100,000
to found and endow an institution for science in Baltimore,
a sum afterwards increased by a second donation of
£100,000 ; of various sums to Harvard University ; and of
£350,000 for the erection of dwelling-houses for tho work-
ing-classes in London, which sum ivas increased by his will
to half a million. If this last benefaction has failed to
produce the good results anticipated, this has been due to
causes for which Peabody was not responsible, and which
do not at all detract from the wise beneficence of the gift.
Ho received from tho Queen the offer of a baronetcy, but
declined it. In 1867 tjio United States Congress awarded
him a special vote of thanks for his many large gifts to
public institutions in America. He died at Eaton Souare,
London, 14th November 1869.