PHILLIPS, JOHN (1800-1874), one of the foremost of
the early geologists of England, was born 26th December
1800 at Harden in Wiltshire. His father belonged to an
old Welsh family, but settled in England as an officer of
excise and married the sister of William Smith, the
" Father of English Geology." Both parents dying when




be was a child, Phillips passed into the care of his uncle.
Before his tenth year he had attended four schools, until
he entered the old school at Holt Spa, Wiltshire, where he
remained for five years, gaining among other acquisition»
that taste for classical learning which remained one of his
distinguishing traits to the end. From school he went to
the house of the Rev. B. Richardson, an accomplished
naturalist, in whoso charge he remained a year, and from
whom he obtained not only much knowledge but tha
strong bent towards the study of nature which thenceforth
became the master-pursuit of his life. His uncle, " Strata
Smith," at that time lived in London, where he exercised
the profession of a f'.vil and mining engineer, though a
very large part of his time and earnings was given to
the preparation of those maps of England and the Engliai
counties on which his fame now rests. In his zeal fcr
geological pursuits Smith often neglected his proper pro-
fessional work, until, as his nephew said, " he had thro-?-?
into the gulf of the Strata all his patrimony and all his
little gains." Eventually he gave up his London bouse
and wandered about the country, as the requirements of
his maps led him. From the time that young Phillips
joined bis uncle in London he remained constantly viih
him, sharing in every piece of professional work, in- tie
preparation of every book and map, and in every tour for
fresh geological information. A youth so trained could
not fail to become a geologist. In the spring of lSi'4
Smith went to York to deliver a course of lectures on.
geology, and his nephew accompanied him. This ???
the starting-point in Phillips's career. His extensive
knowledge of natural science and especially of fossils was
now turned to account. He accepted engagements in tie
principal Yorkshire towns to arrange their museums and
give courses of lectures on the collections contained therein.
York became his residence, where he obtained the situatioa
of keeper of the Yorkshire Museum and secretary of the
Yorkshire Philosophical Society. From that centre be ex-
tended his operations to other towns beyond the county;
and in 1831 he included University College, London, in
the sphere of his' activity. In that year the British
Association for the Advancement of Science was founded
at York, and Phillips was one of the active minds irk:
organized its machinery. He became the assistant gene-nl
secretary, a post of great labour and proportionate use-
fulness, which he held for upwards of thirty years, b
1834 he accepted the professorship of geology at Kind's
College, London, but retained his post at York, comin
up to London every year to give a course of lectures tbera.
This arrangement lasted for six years, until, in 1840, ti
resigned his charge of the York Museum and was appointed
one of the staff of the Geological Survey of Great Britaii
under De la Bêche. In this connexion he spent ???*
time in studying the Palieozoic fossils of Devon, Cornwii!,
and west Somerset, of which he published description
and illustrations. Thereafter he made a detailed surver
of the region of the Malvern Hills, of which he prepared
the elaborate account that appears in vol. ii. of r: ;
Memoirt of the Survey. His direct connexion with ui
National Survey was but of short duration, for in 18?
he accepted the professorship of geology in the nniversiti
of Dublin. Nine years later, on the death of Strickles!
who had acted as substitute for Dr Buckland in tl;
readership of geology in the university of Oxford, PhiffiK
succeeded to the post of deputy, and eventually, at tb
dean's death, became himself reader, a post singukrfr
congenial to him, and which he held up to the time of bis
own death, which was almost tragic in its suddenness
He dined at All Souls' College on 23d April 1874, but a
retiring slipped and fell headlong down a flight of stain
Paralysis at once ensued, and he expired on the afternoon







OCR Output









P H I —P H I 759




of the next day. In 1864 he had been elected ^resident
of the British Association.


Phillips was distinguished among his contemporaries for the
sweetness and bright cheerfulness of hia nature. He had great
fluency os a speaker, and always sooko in so pleasant and interest-
ing a manner as to make him a welcome and indeed, indispensable
interlocutor at the annual gatherings of the British Association.
His social gifts were not less conspicuous than bis attainments
in science. But he was not a mere geologist. His sympathies
went actively forth into the whole domain of science, and he him-
self contributed largely to astronomical literature as well as to
meteorology.


From the timo when he wrote his first paper in 1826 "On the
D'rection of the Diluvial Currents in Yorkshire " down to the
last days of his life Phillips continued a constant contributor
to the literature of his science. The pages of the Journal of the
Geological Society, the Geological Magasine, and other publications
of the day are full of valuable essays by him. He wae also the
anthor of numerous separate works, some of which had an extensive
sale and were of great benefit in extending a sound knowledge of
geology. Among these may be specially mentioned : Illustration»
of Ha Geology of Yorkshire (1835) ; A TrcaliM m Geology (1837-
39) ; Memoirs of William Smith, the Father of English Geology
(1844) ; The Hivers, Mountains, and Sea-Coast of Yorkshire (1853) ;
Manual of Geoloyy, Practical and Theoretical (1855) ; Life on the
Earth : its Origin and Succession (1860) ; Vesuvius (1869) ; Geology
of Oxford and the Tliama Valley (1871). To these should be
added his monographs in the Memoirs of the Geological Survey
and the publications of the Palœontographical Society, and his
geological sections and maps.