QUESNAY, Francois (1694-1774), was one of the
most eminent economists of the 18th century. He was
born at Merey, near the village of Montfort 1'Am amy, about
28 miles from Paris, on the 4th of June, 1694, a year memor-
able also for the birth of Voltaire. He was the son of a
worthy advocate, who'had the reputation of ruining his own
practice by reconciling the parties who came to consult Bun
about their suits. The modest resources of. the family were
derived principally from the cultivation of a small lauded
estate, QuesnayV mother in particular busying herself
much with the details of its management, which_ she
thoroughly understood. His boyish years were thus spent
amidst country scenes and the occupations of the farm,
and he retained to the end a strong predilection for rural
life and a special interest in the welfare of the agricultural
population. Little attention was given to his early
literary instruction; it is aaid that he could not read till
he was eleven years of age, when he was taught partly by
the family gardener, who used as the text book the ifaison
Rustique of Jean LWbault, a work "wherein" (to quote the
words of its old English translator, Richard Surflet, 1606)
"is contained whatever can be required for the building
or good ordering of a husbandman's house or countrey
farme." This book Quesnay is said to have studied with
such assiduity as to have almost known it by heart He
learned Greek and Latin and the elements of several
sciences with scarcely any aid from masters. He was
possessed with an ardent and untiring desire for know-
ledge, and we are told that more than once he walked to
Paris for a book, which he read on his way back the same
day, thus travelling twenty leagues on foot.


At the age of sixteen he became apprentice to a surgeon
in the neighbourhood of Merey, who was not able to teach
him much, and he soon went to Paris to continue his
professional education. He there devoted himself with
great ardour for five or six years to the study of medicine
and surgery, diligently attending the hospitals, and
following the courses of anatomy, chemistry, and botany;
he also learned drawing and engraving, in which he
acquired considerable skill, and gave some- attention to
metaphysics, to which he had been attracted by the
reading of Malebranche's Recherche, de la Verite. About
1718 he established himself at Mantes, and soon obtained
a distinguished clientele. He became known to the
Marechal de Noailles, who conceived a high esteem for
him, and persuaded the queen, whenever she came to
Maintenon, which was not very far from Mantes, to
consult no physician but Quesnay. A celebrated practi-





tioner of the time, named Bilva, having published a
treatise on bleeding, which, though of 'little merit, was
loudly applauded by his friends, Quesnay wrote a refuta-
tion of it, founded on the principles of hydrostatics, which
brought his name, much into notice. When La Peyronnie
had procured .about 1730 the foundation of an academy of
surgery with the view of elevating that profession, he
selected ¦ Quesnay for the post of perpetual secretary.
Coming to Paris to fill it, he obtained through La Pey-
ronie's influence the office of surgeon in ordinary to the
king. He was the author of the remarkable preface which
was prefixed to the first volume of the Memoires of the
academy. He was for a long time much occupied with
the controversies between the faculty of medicine and "the
college of surgery concerning the respective limits of the
4wo professions, and wrote most of the pieces in which
the claims of the latter were asserted. Finding that
frequent attacks of the gout were rendering him incapable
of performing manual operations, he procured in 1744 the
degree of doctor of medicine from the university of Pont-
a-Mousson; but, though thus changing the nature of his
practice, he continued to defend the rights of the -surgical
profession. He soon after purchased the reversion to the
office of physician in ordinary to the king, and afterwards
became his first consulting physician; in this capacity he
was installed in the palace of Versailles, occupying apart-
ments near those of Madame de Pompadour. Louis XV.
esteemed Quesnay much, and used to call him his thinker;
when he ennobled him, he gave him for arms three flowers
of the pansy (pensee), with die motto Propter excogitationem
mentis.


He now devoted himself principally to economic studies,
taking no part in the court intrigues which were perpetu-
ally going on around "him. About the year 1760 he
became acquainted with M. de Gournay, who was also an
earnest inquirer in the economic field; and round these
two distinguished men was gradually formed the-philo-
sophic sect of the Economistes, or, as for distinction's sake
they were afterwards called, the Physiocrates. The most
remarkable men- in this group of disciples were the elder
Mirabeau (author of L'Ami,des Hommes, 1766-60, and
Philosophic Rurale, 1763), the Abbe Bandeau (Introduction
a la Philosophic Economique, 1771), Le Trosne (De VOrdrt
Social, 1777), Morellet (best known by his controversy
with Galiani on the freedom of the corn trade), Merrier
Lariviere, and Dupont de Nemours. Of the writings of the
last two, as well as of the general doctrine of the physio-
crats, some account has been given in the article Political
Economy (see voL xir. pp. 359 sq.). The principal econo-
mic work of Quesnay himself was the Tableau Economique,
which Laharpe called VAlcoran des Economistes. A small
edition de luxe of this work, with other pieces, was
printed in 1768 in the palace of Versailles under the king's
immediate supervision, some of the sheets, it is said, having
been pulled by the royal hand. Already in 1767 tie book
had disappeared from circulation, and no copy of it is now
procurable; but the substance of it is has been preserved
in the Ami des Homines of Mirabeau, and the Physiocrat"
of Dupont de Nemours. In Quesnay's Maximes Generales
du Gouvernement Economique (tun Royaume Ajricolc, which
was put forward as an Extrait des Economies Roycdes de
Sully, and was printed along with the Tableau in 1758,
besides stating his economic doctrines, he expresses his
opinion in favour of a legal despotism as the best form of
government "Let the sovereign authority be single, and
superior to all the individuals of Bociety and all the unjust
enterprises of private interest .... The system of
counter-forces in a government is a harmful one, which
produces only discord among the great and the oppression
of the weak." He had contributed to the Encyclopedic in







OCR Output









QUE-QUB 177




1756 the articles "Fermiere" and "Grains," which con-
tained the earliest announcement of his principles through
the press; and he published a number of minor pieces in
the Jairnal de t'Agriculture, du Commerce, et da Finances,
and in the Sphemerida du Ciloyen. His Droit Naturel,
thich was included in the rkysiocratie of Dupont de
Xemonrs, is especially noteworthy as showing the philo-
sophic foundation of his economic system in the theory of
the jus rtatursc


Interesting notices of Quesnay1* character and habits
kTe been preserved to us in the Memnires of Marmontel
and those of Mmc. du Hausset, fenime de chambre to Mine,
de Pompadour.1 TTU probity and disinterested zeal for
the public good did not suffer from the atmosphere of the
court; he never abused bis credit with the sovereign or
the favourite for any selfish end. To raise the national
sgricultore from the decay into which it had fallen and
to improve the condition of the working population were
the great aims he kept steadily in view. His conversation
sas piquant, humorous, and suggestive, often taking the
form of moral and political apologues. Some of his
•eighty sayings are quoted by contemporary writers.
Here is one of them. Having met in Madame de
Pompadour's salon an official person who, in recommend-
ing violent measures for the purpose of terminating the
relations disputes between the clergy and the parliament,
ised the words, "Cest la hallebarde qui mene un
rojanme," Quesnay replied, "Et qu'est ce qui mono la
hallebarde 1" adding, after a pause, "Cest l'opinion;
cest done but l'opinion qu'il faut travailler." Diderot,
CAlembert, Duclos, Helvetius, Button, Turgot, Marmontel,
ased to meet in his rooms in the palace, and also several
cf the physiocrats above named; and Madame de Fom-
f idour, who affected the patronage of philosophy and


-.nee, sometimes Came to join them and converse with
them. Amongst them, when they were alone, subjects
«ere sometimes discussed in a tone which would not have
pleased the royal ear. Thus, one day, Mirabeau having
aid, "The nation is in a deplorable state," Lariviere
replied in prophetic words, "It can only be regenerated
by a conquest like that of China, or by some great internal
convulsion; but woe to those who live to see that 1 The
French people do not do things by halves!" Adam Smith,
during his stay on the Continent with the young duke of
Buccleuch in 1764—66, spent some time in Paris, where
be made the acquaintance of Quesnay and some of his
followers; he paid a high tribute to their scientificBervices
in his Wealth of Nations, and would have dedicated that
*ork V> Quesnay, had the latter been alive at the time of
its publication.


At the age of seventy Quesnay went back to the study
of mathematics. He thought, we are told, that he had
discovered the quadrature of the circle, and was not pre-
vented by the remonstrances of his friends from printing
his supposed solution of the problem. He died in 1774,
baring lived long enough to. see his great pupil, Turgot, in
office as minister of finance. Quesnay had married in
1718, and had a son and a daughter; his grandson by the
former was a member of the first Legislative Assembly.


The economic writings of Quesnay are collected in tho 2d vol.
• the Prindpaux Economista, published by Guillaumin, with
pirfsce and notes by Engine Daire. His writings on medicine and
""Scry hare now only an historic interest. They were as follows:—
L Oturcations mr la effets de la saignte, 1730 and 1750 ; 2. Essai
Pyttiqve mr ttamamie animate avec Tart de guerir par la saignec,
1785 and 1747; 8. Rcchcrcha critiqua et historiqua mr Toriginc,


These Mimoira were first printed by Qnintin Craiifurd in his
**Kja illistoire et de LUUrature, 1806, and again hi 1817; tlicy
y« tince beta published in the Collection da Mtmoira relati/s d la
***¦ Fnmcaix, 1824, and also in the BMintUqMt da ilimoires
4 lllistmrc de France pendant le IS" Sieclc.




la divers Hats, et la progrls de la chirurgie en France (said to have
been the joint work of Qneanay and Lonia), 1744, and, with slight ly
altered title, 1749; 4. Traili de la suppuration, 1749 ; 6. Trail* is
la gangrene, 1749; 0. TraiU da JUvra continues, 1753 ; 7. Obter-
vations sur la conservation de la vie (said to have been printed at
Versailles along with the Tableau Fconomique), 1758. His other
writings were the article 11 ftridcuco" in the Eneyelopidis, and
Reekcrcha sur Fevidcnce da reriles geontetriqua, with a Projct de
nouveaux Clements de gComCtrie. 1773. Quesnay's Flogs was pro-
nounced in the Academy of Sciences by Grand, j- .in de Fonchy (sec
the Recueil of that Academy, 1774, p. 134). There is a good por-
trait of him. engraved by J. Ch. Francois, which is reproduced in
the Dictionnaire oTFconomie Politique of Coquelin and Guillau-
min. (J. K.I.)