RAMSAY, Allan (1686-1758), author of the Gentle
Shepherd, a pastoral drama in the Lowland Scotch dialect,
was born in Lanarkshire in 1686. An Edinburgh barber
set agoing the literary movement in Scotland that cul-
minated in the poetry of Burns. This peasant-poetry is
often spoken of as if it were a spontaneous indigenous
product, but the harvest that ripened towards the close of
the 18th century had its seed-time earlier, and the seeds
were imported from England. Allan Bamsay was a
peasant by birth (although he claimed kinship with the
nobis family of Dalhousie)—the son of a manager of lead-
mines in Lanarkshire; but the country-bred lad was trans-
planted to a town, being apprenticed at the age of fifteen
to a barber in Edinburgh. In this calling he somehow
made the acquaintance of a band of Jacobite young gentle-
men of literary tastes, was admitted to the convivialities
of their "Easy Club," and formally adjudged "a gentle-
man." The basis of the club seems to have been literary,
the members taking fancy names of celebrities,—Buchanan,
Boece, BickerstaflV and so forth. Ramsay'3 name was
Bickerstaff, and the fact is of some importance as showing
how he was brought into contact with the discussion of the
theory of pastoral poetry among the London wits of the
time. Ramsay's connexion with the Easy Club lay between
1712 and 1715, and in the course of that period occurred
the dispute about pastoral poetry occasioned by the great
publication of Pope's Windsor Forest (see Pope). The
Guardian for 7th April 1713 (No. 23) contained a descrip-
tion of a true pastoral poem, which was afterwards realized
by Ramsay in the. Gentle Shepherd with such scrupulous
fidelity 4n every detail that the criticism might fairly be
described as the recipe from which the poem was made.
There is not a clearer case in literary history of the influ-
ence of criticism on creation; Ramsay's great pastoral—
and it well deserves the epithet—was the main outcome
of the prolonged discussion of that kind of poetry by the
Queen Anne wits. "Pamt the manners of actual rustic life,9
said the Guardian critic to the poet, "not the manners of
artificial shepherds and shepherdesses in a fictitious golden
age; use actual rustic dialect; instead of satyrs and fauns
and nymphs introduce the supernatural creatures of modern
superstition." These precepts Ramsay diligently observed,
and the result was that his Gentle Shepherd not only
attracted attention among the learned students of poetry as
a literary curiosity, the first genuine pastoral after Theo-
critus, but at once became a favourite and a living force
among the peasantry in whose dialect it was written and
for whose characters it furnished ideal models. There was
hardly a farmhouse in Scotland in which a copy of the
poem was not to be found, and the moral force of the ideal
exhibited in the hero Patie may be traced in the character
of Burns and many another Scottish peasant-bard in whom
ostentatious libertinism is not redeemed by the same gtniui
From a moral point of view a better exemplar than Ram-
say's ideal hero might well have been desired. The poet-
laureate of the Easy Club took his moral tone from the
poets of the Restoration, with whom his Jacobite boon com-
panions were in full sympathy; and thus through the genial,
convivial, quick-witted, and slily humorous barber the 5pirn
of the Restoration passed into the homes of the Scotch
peasantry to do battle with the austere spirit of the kirk.







OCR Output









ft A M —R A M 2G7




The Gtnile SliepJierd is the only production of Ramsay's
chat has much claim to remembrance. His lyrics for the
most part are poor artificial imitations, adorned here and
there with pretty fancies, but devoid of sincerity of feeling.
He is happier in his humorous descriptions of character
and occasional personal poems; "renowned Allan, canty
ealkn," as his admirers loved to call him, had a quick
sense of the ridiculous and a firm touch in the exhibition
of vhat amused him. Once he had established a character
aa a poet he abandoned the trade of wig-making, set up as
a bookseller, and was the first to start a circulating library
in Scotland. From his shop in High Street opposite Niddry
Street he issued his incidental poems in broadsheets, and
made a volume of them in 1721, and another in 1728.
The nucleus of the Gentle Shepherd was laid in separately
issued pastoral dialogues; round these the complete drama
was built and published as a whole in 1725. As a col-
lector, editor, imitator, and publisher of old Scottish poetry
Ramsay gave an impetus to vernacular literature at least as
great as that given by his principal original poem. His
Tea-Tahle Miscellany, published in 1724, for which English
aa well as Scottish poets and moderns as well as ancients
were laid under contribution, was extremely popular; and
his Evergreen (1724), a collection of poems written prior
to 1600, was the precursor of Bishop Percy's Relioue* in a
similar field. A collection of Fables, published complete in
1730, part original, part translated from La Motte and La
Fontaine, was Ramsay's last literary work,, but he lived to
an advanced age, dying in 1758, the year before the birth
of Bums. One of the speculations of the enlightened and
enterprising man of business was a theatre, which was
opened in 1736, but soon shut up by the magistrates.


A complete edition of Ramsay's poems was issued by A. Gardner
ia 1877.