REYNOLDS, Sir Joshua (1723-1792), English por-
trait-painter, was born at Plympton Earl, in Devon-
shire, on July 16, 1723. He was educated by his
father, a clergyman and the master of the free grammar
school of the place, who designed his son for the medical
profession. But the boy showed a distinct preferenco
for painting. He was constantly copying the plates in
Drydcn's Plutarch and Cat's Emblem*, and poring over
Jonathan Richardson's Treatise on Art. At the age of
eight, aided by the instructions in The Jesuit's Perspective,
he made a sufficiently correct drawing of the riympton
schoolhouse, which greatly astonished his father. It was
at length decided that the lad should devote himself to art,
and in October 1741 he proceeded to London to study
under Thomas Hudson, a mediocre artist, a nativo of Devon-
shire, who was popular in the metropolis as a portrait
painter. Reynolds remained with Hudson for only two
years, acquiring with uncommon aptitude the technicalities
of the craft, and in 1743 he returned to Devonshire,
where, settling at Plymouth Dock, he employed himself in
portrait 2>ainting. Ry tho end of 1744 ho was again in
London. He was well received by his old master, from
wttoiii he appears previously to have parted with some cold-





ness on both sides. Hudson introduced him to the artists'
club that met in Old Slaughters, St Martin's Lane, and gave
hitn much advice as to his work. Reynolds now painted
his portraits of Captain Hamilton, father of the marquis
of Abercorn, of Mrs Field, of Alderman Tracey, now in the
Plymouth Athenaeum, and of the notorious Miss Chudleigh,
afterwards duchess of Kingston. To this period, or per-
haps to one slightly later, is referable the artist's excellent
oval bust portrait of himself, which was included in the
Grosvenor Gallery Exhibition of 1884. At Christmas
1746 he was recalled to Plympton to attend the lost hours
of his father, after whose death he again established him-
self, now with two of his sisters, at Plymouth Dock, where
he painted portraits, and, as he has himself recorded,
derived much instruction from an examination of some
works by William Gandy of Exeter, whose broad and
forcible execution must have been an excellent correctivo
to the example of Hudson's dry and hard method.


Meanwhile the pleasant urbanity of manner which dis-
tinguished Reynolds throughout life had been winning for
him friends. He had made the acquaintance of Lord
Edgcumbe, and by him was introduced to Captain (after-
wards Viscount Keppel), who was to play an important and
helpful part in the career of the young painter. Keppel was
soon made aware of Reynolds's ardent desire to visit Italy;
and, as he had just been appointed to the command of the
Mediterranean squadron, he gracefully invited the artist to
accompany him in his own ship, the "Centurion." The
offer was gladly accepted. While Keppel was conducting
his tedious negotiations with the dey of Algiers, relative
to the piracy with which that potentate was charged,
Reynolds resided at Port Mahon, the guest of the governor
of Minorca, painting portraits of the principal inhabitants;
and, in December 1749, he sailed for Leghorn, and thence,
with all eagerness, made his way to Rome.


He has confessed that his first sight of the works of
Raphael was a grievous disappointment, and that it
required lengthened study before he could appreciate the
correctness and grace of the master. By the dignity and
imagination of Michelangelo he was deeply impressed;
to the end of life the great Florentine remained for
Reynolds the supreme figure in art; his name was con-
stantly upon his lips, and, as he had wished, it was the last
that he pronounced to the students of the Royal Academy.
Of the influence of Correggio, of his sweetness of expression,
of his method of chiaroscuro, we find frequent traces in the
works of Sir Joshua, especially in his paintings of children;
but after all it was from tho Venetians that the English
painter learned most His own strongest instincts were
towards richness and splendour of colour, and in these
qualities he found unsurpassable examples in the produc-
tions of Titian and Veronese.


While in Rome he avoided, as far as possible, the
temptation to spend his time in copying specific pictures,
which he considered "a delusive kind of industry," by
which " the student satisfies himself with an appearance of
doing something, r.nd falls into the dangerous habit of
imitating without seleciirg." His method of becoming
acquainted with the old masters, and of assimilating their
excellences, was by diligent examination and comparison,
aided by studies of general effect and of individual parts.
His knowledge of the Roman art treasures was dearly
purchased. While working in the corridors of the Vatican
he caught a severe cold, which resulted in the deafness
that clung to him for the rest of his life, and rendered
necessary the ear trumpet which he used in conversation.


After a residence of two years in Rome, Reynolds, in
the spring of 1752, spent four months in visiting Parma,
Florence, Venice, and other important cities of Italy; and,
after a brief stay in Devonshire, he established himself as







OCR Output









R E Y N OLDS 503




a portrait painter in St Martin's Lane, London, whence
he afterwards removed to Great Newport Street, and
finally, in 1760, to Leicester Square, where he continued
to paint till hia death.


Hia first reception on his return was hardly a favourable
one. Hudson called to see his productions and told
him, "Reynolds, you don't paint so well as when you
left England." Ellis, another accepted portrait painter
of the time, who had studied under Kneller, exclaimed,
"This will never answer. Why, you don't paint in the
least like Sir Godfrey,"—adding, as he abruptly left the
room, " Shakespeare in poetry, Kuefler in painting." The
verdict of the public, however, was all on the side of the
young innovator. Lord Edgcumbe played the part of
the generous patron, and exerted himself to obtain com-
missions for his protege, of whose ability the portraits
which he now produced—of the duchess of Hamilton,
the countess of Coventry, Lord Holderness, and especially
of his old friend Keppel —were sufficient guarantee. The
artist's painting-room was thronged with the wealth and
fashion of London, " with women who wished to be trans-
mitted as angels, and with men who wished to appear as
heroes and philosophers "; and he was already afloat upon
that tide of prosperity which never ebbed till the day of
his death. Various other artists contested with him for
popular applause. First the Swiss Liotard had his
moment of popularity; and at a later period there was
Opie, and the more formidable and sustained rivalry of
Gainsborough and of Romney; but in the midst of all,
then as now, Reynolds maintained an admitted supremacy.
And, if the magic of his brush brought him crowds of
sitters, his charm of manner gathered round him numerous
friends. During the first year of his residence in London
he had made the acquaintance of Dr Johnson, which,
diverse as the two men were, became a friendship for life.
To him Burke and Goldsmith, Garrick, Sterne, Bishop
Percy, and, it seems, Hogarth, were before long added.
At the hospitable dinner table of Reynolds such distin-
guished men enjoyed the freest and most unconstrained
companionship, and most of them were members of the
"Literary Club," established, at the painter's suggestion,
in 1764.


In 1760 the London world of art was greatly interested
by the novel proposal of the Society of Artists to exhibit
their works to the public. The hall of the society was at
their disposal for the purpose; and in the month of April
an exceedingly successful exhibition was opened, the pre-
cursor of many thai followed. To this display Reynolds
contributed four portraits. In 1765 the association
obtained a royal charter, and became known as "The
Incorporated Society of Artists"; but much rivalry and
jealousy was occasioned by the management of the various
exhibitions, and an influential body of painters withdrew
from the society, and proceeded to consider the steps that
should be taken in order that their corporate existence
might be recognized. They had access to the young king,
George ILL, who promised his patronage and help. In
December 1768 the Royal Academy was founded, and
Reynolds was elected, by acclamation, its first president,
an honour which more than compensated for his failure to
obtain the appointment of king's painter, which, the pre-
vious year, had been bestowed on Allan Ramsay, a more
courtly but more commonplace artist. In a few months
the king signified his approval of th;\election by knighting
the new president, and intimating that the queen and
himself would honour him with sittings for portraits to be
presented to the Academy.


Reynolds was fitted for his new position no less by his
urbane and courteous manner and by his wide general
culture than by his eminence as an artist. With unwearied




assiduity, with unfailing tact, he devoted himself to
furthering the interests of the new Academy. It was at
his suggestion that the annual banquet was instituted.
To the specified duties of his post he added the delivery
of a presidential address at the distribution of the prizes,
and his speeches on these occasions form the well-known
"discourses" of Sir Joshua. Expressed as they are
with simple elegance and perspicuous directness, these
discourses alone would be sufficient to entitle their author
to literary distinction; indeed, when they were first
delivered, it was thought impossible that they could be
the production of a painter, and Johnson and Burke have
been credited with their composition, in spite of tho
specific denials of both, and of Dr Johnson's indignant
exclamation—" Sir Joshua, sir, would as soon get me to
paint for him as to write for him!"


In the unwearied pursuit of his art, and in the calm
enjoyment of his varied friendships, Sir Joshua's life
flowed on peacefully and happily enough. He was too
prosperous and successful an artist altogether to escape
the jealousy of hi3 less fortunate and less capable brethren,
and he suffered in this way sometimes, especially from
the attacks of Barry, a painter who lived long enough
to regret and, so far as he was able, to rectify his
fault. In 1784, on the death of Ramsay, Reynolds was
appointed painter to the king. Two years previously ho
had suffered from a paralytic attack; but, after a month
of rest, he was able to resume his, painting with unabated
energy and power. In the summer of 1789 his sight
began to fail; he was affected by the yulttt serena, but the
progress of the malady was gradual, and he continued
occasionally to practise his art till about the eud of 1790.
His last years were embittered by a most unfortunate
disagreement with the Royal Academy, relative to the
appointment of a p.ofessor of perspective. Under the
impression that there was a conspiracy against hiin among
the various members, he signified his intention of leaving
the presidential chair, a resignation which he was' after-
wards induced to withdraw, and his final discourse was
delivered on the 10th December 1790. He was still able
to enjoy the companionship of his friends, and he exerted
himself in an effort to raise funds for the erection of a
monument in St Paul's to Dr Johnson, who had died in
1784. Towards the end of 17*91 it was evident to the
friends of Reynolds that he was gradually sinking. For a
few months he suffered from extreme depression of spirits,
the result of a severe form of liver complaint, and on the
23d February 1792 this great artist and blameless gentle-
man passed peacefully away.


Reynolds's first discourse di-als with the establishment of nn
academy for the fine arts, and of its value as being a repository
of the traditions of the best of bygone practice, of " the principles
which many artists have spent their lives in ascertaining. In the
second lecture the study of the painter is divided into three stages,
—iu the first of which he is busied with processes and technicalities,
with the grammar of art, while in the second ho examines what
has been done by other artists, and in the last compares these
results with nature horself. In tile third discourse Reynolds treats
of "the great and leading principles of the grand style"; and
succeeding addresses are devoted to such subjects as "Moderation,"
"Taste," "Genius," and "Sculpture." The fourteenth has an
especial interest as containing an appreciative but discriminating
notice of Gainsborough, who had died shortly before its delivery:
while the concluding discourse is mainly occupied with a panogyric
on Michelangelo.


The other literary works of the prcsidont comprise his three
essays in The Idler for 1759-60 (" On the Grand Style in Painting,"
and " On the True Idea of Beauty "), his notes to Du Fresnoy's Art
of Painting, his Remark) on the Art of the Low Countries-, his
brief notes in Johnson's Shakespeare, and two singularly witty and
brilliant fragments, imaginary conversations with Johnson, which
were never intended by their author for publication, but, found
among his papers after his death, were given to the world by his
niece, the marchioness of Thomond.


But the literary works of Reynolds, excellent as those are, were







OCR Output









504 R H A —R H M




the occupation ofliis more bvo hours and times of leisure. The main
eilbrt of his life was directed to painting, a pursuit which, as he was
never weary of impressing on younger artists, was enough to occupy
a man's whole time, even were it longer than it is, and to call forth
his utmost energy. The unceasing application, perseverance, and
assiduity which form the recurrent burden of Reynold's discourses
found the most complete illustration in his own career. He laid
it down as a distinct principle that each fresh portrait to which
he set his hand should excel the last, and no effort was wanting
to realize this aim. In his search for perfection be would paint
and repaint a subject; when a visitor asked how a certain portion
of tho infant Hercules had been executed, he replied, "How can 1
tell! There are ten pictures below this, some better, some worse."
A method like this contrasts curiously with the swift certainty of
Gainsborough's practice, but it must bo confessed that the produc-
tions of Reynolds have an abiding charm that is wanting in the
exquisite but slighter and more mannered work of his great rival.
In range, too, of subject, as well as of method, the art of Sir Joshua
lias by far the wider reach. "How various the man is," said
Gainsborough once, after he had been examining the president's
portraits hung in an Academy exhibition ; and the remark gains
an added point and emphasis when we compare the paintings of
Reynolds with Gainsborough's own.


In tho work which the painter produced shortly after his return
from Italy—in the Lady Cathcart and her Daughter of 1755, the
Lady Elizabeth Montague and the George, Earl of Warwick, of
1756, and the Countess of Hyndford of 1757—we find a certain
dignity and elegance of pose and arrangement which bears witness
to his foreign studies, joined to some coldness of colour, hardness
of execution, and insistance on definiteness of outline, which con-
trasts with the sweet felicity and tenderness of his fully developed
manner, with its perfect colour, and its form which is lost and
found again in an exquisite mystery. But soon all that is tenta-
tive and immature disappears from his works. In 1758 we have
the gracious and winning full-length of Elizabeth Gunning,
Duchess of Hamilton, and the stately Duke of Cumberland, followed
in 1760 by the Kitty Fisher, and a host of admirable portraits in
which tho men and women and children of the time live still before
our eyes, each possessed with a nameless dignity, or grace, or
sweetness. As tho artist advanced towards old ago his hand only
gained in power, his colour in richness and splendour; his
works show no decadence till the day whon he finally laid aside his
brush. We have nothing finer from his hand than the Mrs Neabitt
as' Circe of 1781, the Mrs Siddons as The Tragic Muse of 1781, the
Duchess of Devonshire and her Child of 1786, and the Infant
Hercules and the Miss Gawtkin as Simplicity of 1788.


In the midst' of his constant practice as av portrait-painter
Reynolds was true to his early admiration of "the grand Btyle,"
to his veneration for the old masters of Italy, to his belief that the
imaginative paths which these men pursued were the highest ways
of art. At the conclusion of his last Academy discourse, while
speaking of Michelangelo, he breaks forth with uncontrollable
emotion, "Were I now to begin tho world again, I would tread
in the steps of that great master; to kiss the hem of his garment,
to catch the slightest of his perfections, would be glory and dis-
tinction enough for an ambitious man."


From the Italians Koynolds couveyed into his own portrait-
subjects a dignity and a grace, along with a power of colour, which
were previously unknown in English art; but he essayed also to
follow them into their own exalted and imaginative paths, to paint
Holy Families and Nativities, to picture the cardinal virtues, and
to realize the conceptions of the poets. But the English portrait-
paintor wanted the visionary power necessary for such tasks; his
productions of this class form the least interesting portion of his
work. They are most successful when the symbolism and the
allegory in them are of the slightest, when the human element is
the main attraction, when he paints as cherub faces five different
views of the countenance of one living English girl, or titles as
"Simplicity" his portrait of Offy Gawtkin or as "Hebe" his
portrait of Miss Meyer. Hia series of " The Virtues," designed for
the window of New College, Oxford, show simply studies of grace-
ful women, lightly draped, and pleasantly posed. His Macbeth
and his Cardinal Beaufort have no real impressiveness, no true
terror ; and the finest of the subjects that he painted for Boydell's
Shakespeare is the Puck, in which the artist's inspiration was
caught, not from the realms of imagination or fancy, but from
observation of the child nature which he knew and loved.


Much has been said regarding the recklessness and want of care
for permanency which characterized the technical methods of Sir
Joshua. While he insisted that his pupils should follow only such
ways of work as were well known and had been tested by time, he
was himself most varying and unsettled in his practice. In his
earnest desire for excellence he tried all known processes, and made
all kinds of fantastic experiments. He was firmly convinced that
the old masters were possessed of technical secrets which had been
lost in later times, and he even scraped the surfaces from portions
of valuable works by Titian and Rubens in tho vain attempt to




probe the mystery. In his efforts to attain tho utmost possible
power and brilliancy of hue ho made use of pigments which are
admittedly the reverse of stable and permafiaut, ho worked with
dangerous vehicles, ho employed both colours and varnishes which
iu combination are antagonistic. Orpiment was mingled with
whito lead; wax-medium, egg-vamish, and osphaltum were freely
used; and, wheu wo read the account of his strangely hap hazard
methods, we are ready to echo Haydon's exclamation—"Tho
wonder is that tho picture did not crack beneath the brush 1" and
aro prepared for such a sight of the vanishing ghosts of master-
pieces as was afforded by so many works in the Reynolds Exhibition
at the Grosvenor Gallery iu 1884. Our only consolation lies in*
the truth expressed by Sir George Beaumont, when his recommen-
dation of Sir Joshua for the execution of a certain work was met
by the objection that his colours faded, that ho "made his pictures
die boforo the man." "Never mind," said Sir George, "a faded
portrait by Reynolds is better than a fresh one by anybody else."


See Molone, The Works of Sir Joshua Reyno'lds, Knight (S vols., 1798); North-
cote, Memoir! of Sir Joshua Reynolds, Kniglit, etc. (1813); Farrlrgton Memoirs
ofthe Life of Sir Joshua Reynolds (1813); bexenj, Literary Worts of Sir Joshua
Reynolds (1832); Cotton, Sir Joshua Reynolds and hie Works (edited by Burnet,
1856); Leslie and Taylor, Life and Times of Sir Joshua Reynolds (2 ».lj ISC.;,)'
and Redgrave, A Century of English Painters, vol. L (1864). (J. M. O.)