SARPI, Pietro (1552-1623), was born at Venice,
August 14, 1552, and was tho son of a small trader, who
left him an orphan at an early age. Quiet, serious,
devoted to study, endowed with great tenacity of applica-
tion and a prodigious memory, the boy seemed born for a
monastic life, and, notwithstanding the opposition of his
relatives, entered the order of the Servi di Maria, a minor
Augustinian congregation of Florentine origin, at tho ago
of thirteen. He assumed tho name of Paolo, by which,
with the epithet Servila, he was always known to his con-
temporaries. In 1570 he sustained no fewer than threo
hundred and eighteen theses at a disputation in Mantua,
with such applause that the duke attached tho youthful
divine to his service by making him court theologian.
Sarpi spent four years at Mantua, applying himself with
tbe utmost zeal to mathematics and the Oriental languages.
He there made the acquaintance of Olivo, formerly secre-
tary to a papal legate at tho council of Trent, from whom
be learned much that he subsequently introduced into his
History. After leaving Mantua for some unexplained
reason, he repaired to Milan, whero ho enjoyed the pro-
tection of Cardinal Borromeo, another authority in the
council, but was soon transferred by his superiors to
Venice, as professor of philosophy at the Servite convent.
In 1579 ho was sent to Rome on business couutctetl with




the reform of his ordor, which occupied him several years,
and brought him into intimate relations with throe
successive popes, as well as the grand inquisitor and other
persons of influence. The impression which tho papul
court made upon him may be collected from his sub-
sequent history. Having successfully terminated tho
affairs entrusted to him. he returned to Venice in 1588,
and passed the next seventeen years in quiet Btudy,
occasionally interrupted by tho part he was compelled to
take in tho internal disputes of his community. In 1601
he was recommended by the Veuetian Benate for the small
bishopric of Caorle, but the papal nuncio, who wished to
obtain it for a protege' of his own. informed the popo
that Sarpi denied the immortality of the soul, and had
controverted the authority of Aristotle. An attempt to
procure another small bishopric in the following year also
failed, Clement VIII. professing to have taken umbrage
at Sarpi's extensive correspondence with learned heretics,
but more probably determined to thwart the desires of the
liberal rulers of Venice. The sense of injury, no doubt,
contributed to exasperate Sarpi's feelings towards the
court t)f Rome, but a man whose master passions wero
freedom of thought and love of country could not have
played any other part than ho did in the great contest
which was impending. For the time, however, he
tranquilly pursued his studies, writing those notes on
Vieta which establish his proficiency in mathematics, and
a metaphysical treatise now lost, which, if Foscariui's
account of it may be relied upon, anticipated the hum
tionalism of Locke. His anatomical pursuits probably
date from a somewhat earlier period. They illustrate his
versatility and thirst for knowledge, but are far from
possessing the importance ascribed to them by the affection
of his disciples. His claim to have anticipated Harvey's
discovery rests on no better authority than a memorandum,
probably copied from Oresalpinus or Harvey himself, with
whom, as well as with Bacou and Gilbert, he maintained a
correspondence. The only physiological discovery which
can be safely attributed to him is that of the contractility
of the iris. It must be remembered, however, that his
treatises on scientific subjects are lost, and only known
from imperfect abstracts.


The prudent Clement died in March 1605; and after
one ephemeral succession and two very long conclaves
Paul V. assumed the tiara with the resolution to strain
papal prerogative to the uttermost. At the same time
Venice was adopting measures to restrict it still further.
The right of the secular tribunals to take cognizance of
the offences of ecclesiastics had been asserted in two
remarkable cases: and the scope of two ancient laws of
the city of Venice, forbidding the foundation of churches
or ecclesiastical congregations without the consent of tho
state, and the acquisition of projierty by priests or
religious bodies, had been extended over the entire
territory of the republic. In January 1606 the papal
nuncio delivered a brief demanding the unconditional sub-
mission of the Venetians. The senate having promised
protection to all ecclesiastics who should in this emergency
aid the republic by their counsel, Sarpi presented a memoir,
pointing out that the threatened censures might be met in
two ways,—de facto, by prohibiting their publication, and
dejure, by an appeal to a general council. The documeut
was received with universal applause, and Sarpi was
immediately made canonist and theological counsellor to
the republic When in tbe following April the last hopes
of accommodation were dispelled by Paul's excommunica-
tion of the Venetians and his attempt to lay their
dominions under an interdict, Sarpi entered with the
utmost energy into the controversy. He prudently began
by republishing tho anti-papal opinions of the famous







OCR Output









512 SARPI




canonist Gerson. In an anonymous tract published
shortly afterwards (Risposta di un Doitore in Teologia)
he laid down principles which struck at the very root of
the pope's authority in secular things. This book was
promptly put upon the Index, and the republication of
Gerson was attacked by Bellarmine with a severity which
obliged Sarpi to reply in an Apologia. The Consideraziuni
tulle Censure and the Trattato dell' Inlerdetto, the latter
partly prepared under his direction by other theologians,
speedily followed. Numerous other pamphlets appeared,
inspired or controlled by Sarpi, who had received the
further appointment of censor over all that should be
written at Venice in defence of the republic. His activity
registers the progress of mankind, and forms an epoch in
the history of free discussion. Never before in a religious
controversy hod the appeal been made so exclusively to
reason and history; never before had an ecclesiastic of
his eminence maintained the subjection of the clergy to
the state, and disputed the pope's right to employ
spiritual censures, except under restrictions which
virtually abrogated it. In so doing he merely gave
expression to the convictions which had long been silently
forming in the breasts of enlightened men, and this, even
more than his learning and acuteness as a disputant,
insured him a moral victory. Material arguments were no
longer at the pope's disposal. The Venetian clergy, a few
religious orders excepted, disregarded the interdict, and
discharged their functions as usual. The Catholic powers
refused to be drawn into the quarrel. At length (April
1607) a compromise was arranged through the mediation
of the king of France, which, while salving over the pope's
dignity, conceded the points at issue. The great victory,
however, was not so much the defeat of the papal preten-
sions as the demonstration that interdicts and excommuni-
cations had lost their force. Even this was not wholly
satisfactory to Sarpi, who longed for the toleration of
Protestant worship in Venice, and had hoped for a separa-
tion from Rome and thd establishment of a Venetian free
church by which the decrees of the council of Trent would
have been rejected, and in which the Bible would have
been an open book. But the controversy had not lasted
long enough to prepare men's minds for so bold a
measure. The republic rewarded her champion with the
further distinction of state counsellor in jurisprudence,
and, a unique mark of confidence, the liberty of access
to the state archives. These honours exasperated his
adversaries to the uttermost; and after citations and
blandishments had equally failed to bring him to Borne
he began to receive intimations that a stroke against him
was preparing in that quarter. On October 5 he was
attacked by a band of assassins and left for dead, but the
wounds were not mortal. The bravos found a refuge in
the papal territories. Their chief, Poma, declared that he
had been moved to attempt the murder by his zeal for
religion, a degree of piety and self-sacrifice which seems
incredible in a bankrupt oil-merchant. "Agnosco stylum
Curiae Romans?," Sarpi himself pleasantly said, when his
surgeon commented upon the ragged and inartistic
character of the wounds, and the justice of the observa-
tion is as incontestable as its wit. The only question can
be as to the degree of complicity of Pope Paul V., a good
man according to his light, but who must have looked
upon Sarpi as a revolted subject, and who would find
casuists enough to assure him that a prince is justified in
punishing rebels by assassins when they are beyond the
reach of executioners.


The remainder of Sarpi's life was spent peacefully in
his cloister, though plots against him continued to be
formed, and he occasionally spoke of taking refuge in
.England. When not engaged in framing state papers, he




devoted himself to scientific studies, and found time for
the composition of several works. A Machiavellian tract
on the fundamental maxims of Venetian policy (Opinions
come oL'bba governarsi la repubblica di Venetia), used by his
adversaries to blacken his memory, though a contemporary
production, is undoubtedly not his. It has been attributed
to a certain Gradenigo. Nor did he complete a reply
which he had been ordered to prepare to the Sijuitinio
della Liberia Venela, which he perhaps found unanswerable
In 1610 appeared his History of Ecclesiastical Benefices,
"in which," says Ricci, "he purged the church of the de-
filement introduced by spurious decretals." In the follow-
ing year he assailed another abuse by his treatise on the
right of asylum claimed for churches, which was imme-
diately placed on the Index. In 1615 a dispute between
the Venetiar CJovemment and the Inquisition respecting
the prohibition of a book led him to write on the history
and procedure of the Venetian Inquisition; and in 1619
his chief literary work, the History of t/te Counril of Trent,
was printed at London under the name of Pietro Soave
Polano, an anagram of Paolo Sarpi Veneto. The editor,
Marco Antonio de Dominis, has been accused of falsifying
the text, but a comparison with a MS. corrected by Sarpi
himself shows that the alterations are both unnecessary
and unimportant. This memorable book, together with
the rival and apologetic history by Cardinal Pallavicini,
is minutely criticized by Ranke (History of the Popes,
appendix No. 3), who tests the veracity of both writers by
examining the use they have respectively made of their
MS. materials. The result is not highly favourable to
either, nor wholly unfavourable; neither can be taxed with
deliberate falsification, but both have coloured and sup-
pressed. They write as advocates rather than historians.
Each had access to sources of information denied to the
other; so that, although it may be true in a sense that the
truth lies between them, it cannot be attained by taking
the middle way between their statements. Ranke rates
the literary qualities of Sarpi's work very highly. "Sarpi
is acute, penetrating, and sarcastic; his arrangement isj
exceedingly skilful, his style pure and unaffected. In
power of description he is without doubt entitled to the
second place among the modern historians of Italy. I
rank him immediately after Machiavelli." Sarpi never
acknowledged his authorship, and baffled all the efforts of
the Prince de Conde to extract the secret from him. Ha
survived the publication four years, dying on January 15,
1623, labouring for his country to the last The day
before his death he had dictated three replies to questions
on affairs of state, and his last words were "Esto per-
petua." His posthumous History of t)ie Interdict was
printed at Venico the year after his death with the
disguised imprint of Lyons.


Sarpi's services to mankind arc now acknowledged by all except the
most extreme Ultramontane partisans; and of his general character
it is enough to say that even theological hatred has been nnablo to fix




the least personal imputation npou him. To the highest qualities
of the scholar, the statesman, and the patriot he added charity, mag-
nanimity, and disinterestedness. The only point on which his con-





duct may be thought to requiro apology is the reserve in which ho
shrouded his religious opinions. Great light has been thrown upon
his real belief and the motives of his conduct by the letters ofChris-
toph von Dohna, envoy of Christian, prince of Anhalt, to Venice, pub-
lished by Moritz Ritter in tho Br 'ufc und Aden zur GeschichU da
dreissigjahrigen Krieges, vol. ii. (Munich, 1874). Sarpi told Dohna
that he greatly disliked saying mass, and celebrated it as seldom
as possible, but that ho was compiled to do so, as he would other-





wise seem to admit the validity of the papal prohibition, and thus;
betray tho cause of Venice. This supplies tho key to his whole'1
behaviour; ho was a patriot first and a religious reformer after-.'




wards. He was most anxious to obtain liberty of Protestant worship
at Venice, but scarcely proceeded beyond good wishes, partly from
prudence, partly from being "rooted " in what Diodati described
to Dohna as "tho most daugcrsus maxim, that God does not
regard externals so loug as the mind and heart are rig*! before







OCR Output









S A R- -S A R 313




Him." "It is of little avail," adds PioJati, "to dispute with him.
for all blows fall inetlbctually upon the sweetness and maturity of
affections and spirit which raise him above well ni^li every
emotion." Sarpi had another maxim, which he thus formulated to
Dohna: "Ze/flWsi'fd nondico inai tnai, ma la vtrita non aognuno.u
It must further be considered that, though Sarpi admired tho
English prayer-book, he was neither Anglican, Lutheran, nor
Calvinist, and might have found it difficult to accommodate
himself to any Protestant church. On the whole, the opinion of Le
Courayer, uqu' U etait Catholiquc cn gros ct quclnuo fois Protestant
on detail," seems not altogether groundless, though it can no longor
be accepted as a satisfactory summing up of the question. His
discoveries in natural science have been overrated, but his scientific
attainments must have been great. Galileo would not have wasted
his time in corresponding with a man from whom he could learn
nothing; and, though Sarpi did not, as has been asserted, invent
the telescope, he immediately turned it to practical account by
constructing a map of the moon.


Sarpi'a Ufa was written by lib enthusiastic disciple. Father Fnlcenslo Ulranzlo,
whose work does bouocr to )>!¦ heart, but it both meugTO and uncritical.
Blnnchl-Glovinl'e modern biography (183C) la giostly marred by digressions, but
ts on ttie whole the most tatUlactc-rjr extant, though Inferior In some re*pccri to
that by Miss Arabella Gcqrglna Campbell (1969), a labour of love, enriched by
numerous references to HsS. unknown to bianrhl-Gtovlnl. The numerous mis-
prints which dlangura the English edition of this work have been corrected In
¦A Italian translation. T. A. Trollops s Pout the Pope and Paul the Friar (1861)
is In the main a mere abstract of Duuichi-Giovinl, but adds a spirited account of
the conclave of Psul V. ITie Incidents of the Venetian dispute from day to day
are related In the contemporary dl.irles published by Enrico Comet (Vienna,
19*9), Oluato Fontanel's Storia Arcana de'ta Ytta 41 PUtro Sarpi (1863), a
hitter libel, Is nevertheless Important for the letters of Saipl it contains, ss
Orisellni's ifemorU Anedot* (17G0) Is from the suthor's sect is to Surpl's nn-
pnblislied writings, afterwards unfortunately destroyed by Are. Foacarlni's
I/iitary e/ Ymrtian Literature Is Important on the same account. Sarpl's
memoirs on state affairs remain In the Venetian archives. Portions of his
correspondence have boon printed at various times, snd lnedlted letters from
hint are of frequent occurrence In public libraries. The King's Library In the
British Museum hss a valuable collection of tracts In the Interdict controversy,
formed by Consul Smith. (B. O.)