TAYLOR, Brook (1685-1731), a distinguished mathe-
matician of Newton's school, was the son of John Taylor,
of Bifrons House, Kent, by Olivia, daughter of Sir Nicholas
Tempest, Bart, of Durham, and was born at Edmonton
in Middlesex, August 18, 1685. He entered St John's
College, Cambridge, as a fellow-commoner in 1701, and
took degrees of LL.B. and LL.D. respectively in 1709 and
1714. Having studied mathematics with applause under
Machin and Keill, he obtained in 1708 a remarkable
solution of the problem of the "centre of oscillation,"
which, however, remaining unpublished until May 1714
(Phil. Trans., vol. xxviii. p. 11), his claim to priority was
unjustly disputed by John Bernoulli. Taylor's Methodxts
Incrementorum Directa et Inversa (London, 1715) added a
new branch to the higher mathematics, now designated the
"calculus of finite differences." Among other ingenious
applications, he used it to determine the form of movement
of a vibrating string, by him first successfully reduced to
mechanical principles. The same work contained (p. 23)
the celebrated formula known as "Taylor's theorem." It
is of extensive use in almost every analytical inquiry; but
its full importance remained unrecognized until pointed
out in 1772 (Berlin Memoirs) by Lagrange, who later
termed it "le principal fondement du calcul differentiel."


In his essay on Linear Perspective (London, 1715)
Taylor set forth the true principles of the art with much
originality, and in a more general form than any of his
predecessors. The little work suffered, however, from the
brevity and obscurity which affected most of his writings,
and needed the elucidation bestowed on it in the treatises
of Joshua Kirby (1754) and Daniel Fournier (1761).


Taylor was elected a fellow of the Boyal Society early in
1712, sat in the same year on the committee for adjudi-
cating the claims of Newton and Leibnitz, and acted as
secretary to the society January 13, 1714, to October
21, 1718. During a visit to Paris in 1716 he made
acquaintance with Bossuet and the Comte de Caylus, and
knit a warm friendship with Bolingbroke, whom he visited
at La Source in 1720. From 1715 his studies took
a philosophical and religious bent. He corresponded, in
that year, with the Comte de Montmort on the subject
of Malebranche's tenets; and unfinished treatises, "On the
Jewish Sacrifices" and "On the Lawfulness of Eating
Blood," written on his return from Aix-la-Chapelle in
1719, were afterwards found among his papers. His
marriage in 1721 with Miss Brydges of Wallington,
Surrey, led to an estrangement from his father, a person
of somewhat morose temper, which terminated in 1723
after the death of the lady in giving birth to a son. The
ensuing two years were spent by him with his family at
Bifrons, and in 1725 he married, with the paternal appro-
bation, Sabetta, daughter of Mr Sawbridge of Olantigh,
Kent, who, by a strange fatality, died also in childbed in
1730; in this case, however, the infant, a daughter,
survived. Weighed down by repeated sorrows, Taylor's
fragile health gave way; he fell into a decline, died
December 29, 1731, at Somerset House, and was buried
at St Ann's, Soho. By his father's death in 1729 he




had inherited the Bifrons estate. Socially as well as in-
tellectually gifted, he possessed a handsome person and
engaging manners, and was accomplished to an uncommon
degree in music and painting. As a mathematician, he was
the only Englishman after Newton and Cotes capable of
holding his own with the Bernoullis; but a great part of
the effect of his demonstrations was lost through bis failure
to express his ideas fully and clearly.


A posthumous work entitled Contemplatio Philosophica was
printed for private circulation in 1793 by his grandson, Sir William
Young, Bart, prefaced by a life of the author, and with an appendix
containing letters addressed to him by Bolingbroke, Bossuet, ic.
Several short papers by him were published in Phil. Trans., vols,
xrvii. to xxxu., including accounts of some interesting experiments
in magnetism and capillary attraction. He issued in 1719 an
improved version of his work on perspective, with the title New
Principles of Linear Perspective, revised by Colson in 1749, and
printed again, with portrait and life of the author, in 1811. A
French translation appeared in 1753 at Lyons. Taylor gave {lie.
thodus Inaementorum, p. 108) the first satisfactory investigation of
astronomical refraction.


See Watt, Bibliotheca BrUatmica; Hutton, Phil, and Math. Dictionary; Fella,
Biog. del Muiicicnt; Tti. Thomson. Hilt, of the ft. Society, p. 303; Giant, Hist.
Phyt. Attronomy, p. 877; Uartfl, BUI. del Sciences, Til. p. 331.