TENIERS, David (1610-1690), the younger, a Flemish
painter, almost ranking in celebrity with Rubens and
Van Dyck, was born in Antwerp on 15th December 1610.
His father, David Teniers the elder (1582-1649), whose
style he followed with a vastly superior power of concep-
tion, had been a pupil of Elsheimer in Rome and of Rubens
in Antwerp. Besides these influences, we can also dis-
tinctly trace that of Adrian Brouwer at the outset of his
career. Although the young painter's general system often
reminds us of Rubens, several of his works also betray a
vivid recollection of Brouwer in type as well as general
arrangement. There is no evidence, however, that either
Rubens or Brouwer interfered in any way with Teniers's
education, and Smith may be correct in supposing that
the admiration which Brouwer's pictures at one time ex-
cited alone tempted the younger artist to imitate them.
The only trace of personal relations having existed between
Teniers and Rubens is the fact that the ward of the latter,
Anne Breughel, the daughter of John (Velvet) Breughel,
married Teniers in 1637. Admitted as a "master" in the
guild of St Luke in 1632, Teniers had even before this
made the public acquainted with his works. The Berlin
museum possesses a group of ladies and gentlemen dated
1630. No special signature positively distinguishes these
first productions from those of his father, and we do not
think it correct to admit with some writers that he first
painted religious subjects. Dr Bode, in a most remarkable
study of Brouwer and his works, expresses the opinion that
Teniers's earliest pictures are those found under the signa-
ture "Tenier" (with the omission of the final «). Tenier
is in reality a Flemish version of a thoroughly Walloon
name, "Taisnier," which the painter's grandfather, a mercer,
brought with him when he came from Ath in 1558, and
Bode's supposition is greatly strengthened by the circum-
stance that not only David the elder but his brother
Abraham and his four sons were all inscribed as "Tenier"
in the ledgers of the Antwerp guild of St Luke. Soma
really first-rate works—the Prodigal Son and a group of
Topers in the Munich gallery, as well as a party of gentle-
men and ladies at dinner, termed the Five Senses, in the







OCR Output









174 TEN IERS




Brussels museum—with the above signature are remark-
able instances of the perfection attained by the artist when
he may be supposed to have been scarcely twenty. His
touch is of the rarest delicacy, his colour at once gay and
harmonious. Both Waagen and Smith express the opinion
that the works painted from 1645 to 1650 speak most
highly of the master's abilities. We may venture to add
that a considerable number of earlier productions would
have been sufficient to immortalize his name. He was
little over thirty when the Antwerp guild of St George
enabled him to paint the marvellous picture which ulti-
mately found its way to the Hermitage Gallery in St Peters-
burg,—the Jubilee Meeting of the Civic Guards, in honour
of their old commander, Godfrey Sneyders. Correct to the
minutest detail, yet striking in effect, the scene, under the
rays of a glorious sunshine, displays an astonishing amount
of acquired knowledge and natural good taste. This paint-
ing, one of forty among many of the master's earlier and
later productions,1 leads us to mention another work of the
same year (1643), now in the National Gallery, London
(No. 952), an equally beautiful repetition of which, dated
1646, belongs to the duke of Bedford. A hundred and fifty
figures are resting after a pilgrimage to some holy shrine or
some miraculous well. The hungry travellers are waiting
for the meal which is being prepared for them in several
huge caldrons. Truth in physiognomy, distribution of
groups, the beautiful effect of light and shade, command
our warmest admiration. A work like this, says Waagen,
stamps its author as the greatest among painters of his
class. That, however, a subject of the kind should have
been accepted as a "feast" (see the National Gallery
Catalogue) may tend to prove how little, from the first,
Teniers thought of dramatizing. Frankness in expression
and freedom in attitude certainly guided his preference
in the choice of a model, and we may even suppose him to
have occasionally exaggerated both. He seems anxious to
have it known that, far from indulging in the coarse
amusements of the boors he is fond of painting, he himself
lives in good style, looks like a gentleman, and behaves as
such. He never seems tired of showing the turrets of his
chateau of Perck, and in the midst of rustic merry-makings
we often see his family and himself received cap in hand by
the joyous peasants. We may also observe that he has a
certain number of favourite models, the constant recur-
rence of which is a special feature of his works. We even
meet them in a series of life-size portrait-like figures in the
Doria Pamphili Gallery in Rome,* as well as in a picture
belonging to Mr H. R. Hughes, and the man here repre-
sented as a fishmonger is unmistakably the painter's
brother, Abraham Teniers, judging from the portrait
Edelinck has left us of this artist.


Taniers was chosen by the common council of Antwerp
to preside over the guild of painters in 1644. The arch-
duke Leopold William, who had assumed the government
of the Spanish Netherlands, being a great lover of art,
employed Teniers not only as a painter but as keeper of
the collection of pictures he was then forming. With the
rank and title of "ayuda de camara," Teniers took up his
abode in Brussels shortly after 1647. Immense sums were
spent in the acquisition of paintings for the archduke. A
number of valuable works of the Italian masters, now in
the Belvedere in Vienna, came from Leopold's gallery after
having belonged to Charles L and the duke of Buckingham.
De Bie (1661) states that Teniers was some time in London,
collecting pictures for the duke of Fuensaldana, then acting
as Leopold's lieutenant in the Netherlands. Paintings in


1 The Hermitage Catalogue ascribes to Abraham Teniers the portrait
of a bishop. This painting is, however, by David, and represents the
celebrated bishop of Ghent, Anthony Trust, with his brother Francis,
i. Franciscan monk. » Under the name of Weenjnx.




Madrid, Munich, Vienna, and Brussels have enabled art
critics to form an opinion of what the imperial residence
was at the time of Leopold, who is represented as con-
ducted by Teniers and admiring some recent acquisition.
No picture in the gallery is omitted, every one being in-
scribed with a number and the name of its author, so that
the entemble of these paintings might serve as an illus-
trated inventory of the collection.* Still more interesting
is a canvas, now in the Munich gallery, where we see
Teniers at work in a room of the palace, with an old
peasant as a model and several gentlemen looking on.
When Leopold returned to Vienna, Teniers's task ceased;
in fact, the pictures also travelled to Austria, and a Flemish
priest, himself a first-rate flower painter, Van der Baren,
became keeper of the archducal gallery. Teniers never-
theless remained in high favour with the new governor-
general, Don Juan, a natural son of Philip IV. The prince
was his pupil, and De Bie tells us he took the likeness of
the painter's son. Honoured as one of the greatest painters
in Europe, Teniers seems to have made himself extremely
miserable through his aristocratic leanings. Shortly after
the death of his wife in 1656 he married Isabella de Fren,
daughter of the secretary of the council of Brabant, and
strove his utmost to prove his right to armorial bearings.
In a petition to the king he reminded him that the honour
of knighthood had been bestowed upon Rubens and Van
Dyck. The king at last declared his readiness to grant
the request, but on the express condition that Teniers
should give up selling his pictures. The condition was
not complied with; but it may perhaps account for the
master's activity in favour of the foundation in Antwerp
of an academy of fine arts to which artists alone should
be admitted, whereas the venerable guild of St Luke made
no difference between art and handicraft: carvers, gilders,
bookbinders, stood on an even footing with painters and
sculptors, however great their talent.* There were great
rejoicings in Antwerp when, on 26th January 1663, Teniers
came from Brussels with the royal charter of the academy,
the existence of which was due entirely to his personal
initiative.


Teniers died in Brussels on 25th April 1690.' A
picture in the Munich gallery (No. 906), dated 1680,
represents him as an alchemist, oppressed with a burden
of age beyond his years. From this date we hear more
of his doings as a picture-dealer than as a painter, which
most probably gave birth to the legend of his having given
himself out as deceased in order to get higher prices for
his works. David, his eldest son, a painter of talent and
reputation, died in 1685. One of this third Teniers's
pictures—St Dominic Kneeling before the Blessed Virgin,
dated 1666—is still to be found in the church at Perck.
As well as his father, he contributed many patterns to the
celebrated Brussels tapestry looms. Cornelia, the painter's
daughter, married John Erasmus Quellin, a well-known
artist (1634-1715).


Smith's Catalogue Raisonnt gives descriptions of over 700 paint-
ings accepted as original productions of Teniers. Few artists ever
worked with greater ease, and some of his smaller pictures—land-
scapes with figures—have been termed "afternoons," not from
their subjects, but from the time spent in producing them. The
museums in Madrid, St Petersburg, Vienna, Munich, Dresden,
Paris, London, and Brusstls have more than 200 pictures by Teniers.
In the United Kingdom 150 may be found in private hands, and
many other examples are to be met with in private collection!
throughout Europe. Although the spirit of many of these works


* It was not until recently that the MS. inventory of this collection
was discovered among the papers of the prince of Schwartzenberg in
Vienna. It was published in 1883 by Adolf Berger. In 1658 Teniers
published 243 etchings after the best Italian works of Leopold William's
collection, which, with the portraits of the archduke and Teniers, were
brought together as a volume in 1860, under the title £1 Teatn de
Pinlurae. * The separation was only obtained in 1773.


• The date is often wrongly given as 1694 or 1695.







OCR Output









'T E N —T E N 175




b m a whole marvellous, their conscientiousness must be regarded
u questionable. Especially in the later productions we often
detect • lick of earnestness and of the calm and concentrated study
of nature Which alone prevent expression from degenerating into
grimace in situations like those generally depicted by Teniers. _ His
edocation, and still more his real and assumed position in society,
to t great degree account for this. Brouwer knew more of taverns;
Ostade was more thoroughly at home in cottages and humble dwell*
inp; Teniers throughout triumphs in broad daylight, and, though
nur of his interiors may be justly termed masterpieces, they seldom


Soil his open-air scenes, where he has, without constraint, given
1 play to the bright resources of his luminous palette. In this
rupect, as in many others, he almost invariably suggc3ts compan-
ion with Watteau. Equally sparkling and equally joyous, both
wetn to live in an almost ideal world, where toil, disease, and
porerty may exist, but to be soon forgotten, and where Bunshine
awns everlasting. But his subjects taken from the Gospels or
sarol legend are.absurd. An admirable picture in the Louvre
¦bows Peter Denying his Master, next to a table where soldiers
in atnoking and having a game at cards. He likes going back to
nbjecti illustrated two centuries before by Jerome Bosch—the
Ttmptation of St Anthony, the Rich Man m Hell, incantations,
icd witches—for the simple purpose of assembling the most comic
apparitions. His villagers drink, play bowls, dance, and sing;
tie; seldom quarrel or fight, and, if they do, seem to be shamming.
His powers certainly declined with advancing age; the works of
list begin to look hasty. But this much may be said of Teniers,
that no other painter shows a more enviable ability to render a
conception to his own and other people's satisfaction. His works
bare a technical freshness, a straightforwardness in means and
intent, which make the study of them most delightful; as Sir
Joshua Reynolds says, they are worthy of the closest attention of
aj painter who desires to excel in the mechanical knowledge of
hi art


As an etcher Teniers compares very unfavourably with Ostade,
Cornelia, Bega, and Dusart More than 500 plates were made from
hti pic tores; and, if it be true that Louis XIV. judged his "baboons"
(noeoU) unworthy of a place in the royal collections, they found
admirable engravers in France — Le Baa and his scholars—and
passionate admirers. The duke of Bedford's admirable specimen
ni sold for 18,030 lines (£1860) in 1788. The Prodigal Son, now
h the Louvre, fetched 30,000 livres (£3095) in 1776. Smith's
highest estimates have long since been greatly exceeded. The
archers in St Petersburg he gives as worth £2000. The Belgian
Government gave £5000 in 1867 for the Village Pastoral of 1652,
vhich is now in the Brussels museum; and a picture of the Prodigal
Sea, scarcely 16 by 28 inches, fetched £5280 in 1876.


Although Van Tilborgh, who was a scholar of Teniers in Brussels,
Wowed his stjle with some success, and later painters often excelled
m figure-painting on a small scale, Teniers cannot be said to have
farmed s school. Properly speaking, he is the last representative
of the great Flemish traditions of the 17th century.


Stc T. 8mith, A Catalogue Raieonni of the Works of the mot. Eminent Dutch,
T/nua, and French Painters; John Varmoelen, Notice hietcrique sur David
'even et ea fitmille; L. Qmletloot, Quelqvce reneeignsments ntr la fiimille ds
t-1. Svbene et le dicee de David Teniers and Un prods de David Teniers et
'* nrvoration dee peintree a Brusellee; Alph. Wauters, Bietoire dee environs
it BnueUss aod Lee tapieseriee bruxetloisss; F. T. Tan der Branderu, Ge-
eSwtnie der AntioeryecKe Schilderschool; Max Roosea, GtechUhte der Maler-
w-l- Asivxrpene: W. Bode, Adrian Brovvjer, sin Bild seine Lebens and seines
fea-Jtaa. (H. H.)