TREVITHICK, Richard (1771-1833), inventor of the
locomotive, was descended from a family of great antiquity
in the eounty of Cornwall, and was born 13th April 1771,
in the parish of Illogan. Shortly afterwards the family re-
moved to Penponds, near Camborne, where the boy attended
his first and only school, his attainments being limited to
reading, writing, and arithmetic. Though slow and obstin-
ate as a scholar, he spent much time drawing lines and
figures on his slate, and possessed such instinctive skill in
mechanics that while still a youth he was able to solve a
difficulty in the correction of underground levels which had
puzzled some of the mine agents. He inherited more than
the average strength for which his family were famous,
standing 6 feet 2 inches in height, while his frame was the
very model of an athlete. His feats in wrestling and lift-
ag and throwing weights were unexampled in the district.
At the age of eighteen he began to assist his father as mine
manager, and, manifesting great fertility of mechanical in-





vention, was soon recognized as the great rival of Watt in
improvements on the steam-engine (see vol. xxii. p. 476).
On the death of his father in 1797, he succeeded him as
leading engineer in Cornish mining. He married the same
year. His earliest invention of importance was his improved
plunger pole pump (1797), which has superseded all others
for deep mining. In 1798 he applied the principle of
the plunger pole pump to the construction of the water-
pressure engine, which he subsequently improved in various
ways. About this time he also perfected a high-pressure
non-conducting steam-engine, which became a successful
rival of the low-pressure steam-vacuum engine of Watt
At an early period he had begun experiments in the con-
struction of locomotives, and a model constructed by him
before 1800 is now in the South Kensington Museum. On
Christmas eve 1801 his common road locomotive carried
the first load of passengers ever conveyed by steam, and on
24th March 1802 he and Andrew Vivian applied for a
patent for steam-engines in propelling carriages. In 1803
his locomotive was run in the streets of London, from
Leather Lane by Gray's Inn Lane and along Oxford Street
to Paddington, the return journey being made by Islington.
The cost was, however, found too great, and his thoughts
were now directed to the construction of a steam loco-
motive for tramways, with such success that in February
1804 he worked a tramroad locomotive in Wales, running
with facility up and down inclines of 1 in 50. In 1808
he constructed a circular railway in London near Euston
Square, on which the public were carried at the rate of
twelve or fifteen miles an hour round curves of 50 or 100
feet radius. The ideas of Trevithick were successfully
developed by Stephensou so as to revolutionize the system
of modern travelling, but Trevithick had made consider-
able progress towards this before Stephenson had begun
his experiments. Trevithick applied his high-pressure
engine with great success to rock boring and breaking, as
well as to dredging. In 1806 he entered into a twenty-
one years' engagement with the board of Trinity House,
London, to lift ballast from the bottom of the Thames, at
the rate of 500,000 tons a year, for a payment of 64 a
ton. The following year he was appointed along with
Vazie to execute the Thames driftway, but the work was
abandoned owing to disputes about payment when unex-
pected difficulties bad occurred. He then set up work-
shops at 72 Fore Street, Limehouse, for the construction of
iron tanks and buoys and model iron ships. He was the
first to recognize the importance of iron in the construction
of large ships, and in various ways his ideas have also
influenced the construction of steamboats. In the appli-
cation of steam to agriculture the name of Trevithick
occupies one of the chief places. A high-pressure steam
threshing engine was erected by him in 1812 at Trewithen,
the property of Sir Charles Hawkins, while, in the same
year, in a letter to the Board of Agriculture, he stated his
belief that every part of agriculture might be performed
by steam, and that such a use of the steam-engine would
"double the population of the kingdom and make our
markets the cheapest in the world." In 1814 he entered
on an agreement for the construction of engines for the
Peruvian mines, and to superintend their working removed
to Peru in 1816. Thence he went in 1822 to Costa Rica.
He returned to England in 1827, and in 1828 petitioned
parliament for a reward for his inventions, but without
success. He was equally unsuccessful in his endeavours
to induce the lords commissioners of the Admiralty to
afford him facilities for demonstrating the value of certain
improvements he claimed to have made in steam navigation.
He died 22d April 1833.


See Life of Richard Trevithick, with an Account o/Ail/nwa*"*
by Francis Trevithick, C.E., 2 vols., 1872.