UEBERWEG, Frtedrich (1826-1871), best known by
his History of Philosophy, was born on the 2 2d January
1826 at Leichlingen, in Rhenish Prussia, where his father
was Lutheran pastor. His mother, left early a widow,
devoted her scanty means to the education of her only
son. Ueberweg passed through the gymnasium at Elber-
feld, and studied at the universities of Gottingen and
Berlin. In 1852 he qualified himself at Bonn as privat-
docent in philosophy. His System of Logic, published in
1857 (English translation 1871), and his essay On the
Authenticity find the Order of the Platonic Writings, crowned
by the Imperial Academy of Vienna (published 1861), con-
tributed to draw attention to him as at once a scholar and
a thinker. In 1862 he was called to Kbnigsberg as extra-
ordinary professor, and in 1867 he was advanced to the
ordinary grade. He married in 1863, and on the 9th June
1871 he died prematurely.


The chief work of his later years was his compendious History of
Philosophy, which is unmatched for fulness of information com-
bined with conciseness, accuracy, and impartiality of treatment
The first part appeared in 1862. An English translation, in two
volumes, was published in 1872, and has gone through several
editions. Ueberweg translated, in 1869, Berkeley's Principles of
Human Knowledge, with notes, fdr Kirchmanu ¦ Philosophische
Bibliothck. In philosophy Ueberweg was strongly opposed to the
subjectivistio tendency of the Kantian system, maintaining in
particular the objectivity of space and time, which involved him in
a somewhat violent controversy with seversl opponents. His own
mode of thought he preferred to describe as an ideal realism, which
refused to reduce reality to thought, but asserted a parallelism be-
tween the forms of existence and the forms of knowledge. Beneke
and Schleiermacher seem to have exercised moat influence npon
the development of his thought A short memoir, by his friend
F. A. Lange (author of the History of Materialism), giTcs oomo
account of what may be called personal opinions in philosophy and
theology, which did not find expression in Ucberwcg's published
writings.