VARLEY, John (1778-1842), water-colour painter, was
born at Hackney, London, on 17th August 1778. His
father, a man of scientific attainments and tutor in the
family of Lord Stanhope, discouraged his leanings towards
art, and placed him under a silversmith. But on his
parent's death Varley escaped from this uncongenial em-
ployment, and, after working with a portrait painter, en-
gaged himself at the age of sixteen to an architectural
draughtsman, who took him on a provincial tour to sketch
the principal buildings in the towns they visited. His
spare hours were employed in sketching from nature, and
in the evenings he was permitted, like Turner and Oirtin,




to study in the house of Dr Munro. In 1798 he exhibited
his first work, a View of Peterborough Cathedral in the
Royal Academy. In 1799 he visited North Wales, and in-
its wild mountain scenery found the subjects best suited
to his brush. He returned to the same district in 1800,
and again in 1802, and the impressions then received
powerfully influenced the whole course of his art. In
1804 he became a foundation member of the Water-Colour
Society, and contributed over forty works to its first ex-
hibition. He had married in the previous year; and, in
order to provide for the wants of an increasing family, he
was obliged to produce for the dealers much work of a
slight and commonplace character. He also taught draw-
ing, and some of his pupils, such as John Linnell and
William Hunt, afterwards became celebrated. He was a
firm believer in astrology, skilful in casting horoscopes;
and some curious instances were related of the truth of
his predictions. It was at his house that his friend
William Blake sketched his celobrated Visionary Heads.
Varley died at London on 17th November 1812.


Varley's landscapes are graceful and solemn in feeling, and simple
and broad in treatment, being worked with a full brush aud purs
fresh transparent tints, usually without any admixture of body-
colour. Though his works are rather mannered and conventional,
they are well considered and excellent in composition. Some of
hia earlier water-colours, including his Views of the Thames, were
painted upon the spot, and possess greater individuality than his
later productions, which are mainly compositions of mountain aud
lake scenery, produced without direct reference to nature. Among
his literary works are Zodiacal Phytiology, 1828; Observations on
Colour and Sketching from A'aiure, 1830; A Practical Treatise on
Perspective, and Principles of Landscape Design for Young Artists.