VASARI, Giorgio (1513-1574), a painter and architect,
whose main distinction rests on his valuable history , of
Italian art,1 was born at Arezzo in 1513. At a very early
age he became a pupil of Guglielmo da Marsiglia, a very
skilful painter of stained glass. At the age of sixteen he
went to Florence, where he studied under Michelangelo
and Andrea del Sarto, aided by the patronage of the
Medici princes. In 1529 he visited Rome and studied
the work3 of Raphael and others of his school. The
paintings of Vasari were much admired by the rapidly
degenerating taste of the 16th century; but they possess
the smallest amount of merit, being in the main feeble
parodies of the powerful works of Michelangelo. Vasari
was largely employed in Florence, Rome, Naples, Arezzo,
and other places. Many of his pictures still exist, the
most important being the wall and ceiling paintings in
the great hall of the Palazzo Vecchio in Florence, and hi3
frescos on the cupola of the cathedral, which, however,
were not completed at the time of his death. As an
architect he was perhaps more successful: the loggia of
the Uffizi by the Arno, and the long passage connecting
it with the Pitti Palace, are his chief works. Unhappily
he did much to injure the fine mediaeval churches of S.
Maria Novella and Santa Croce, from both of which he
removed the original rood-screen and loft, and remodelled
the retro-choir in the degraded taste of his time. Vasari
enjoyed a very high repute during his lifetime and amassed
a considerable fortune. He built himself in 1547 a fine
house in Arezzo, and spent much labour in decorating its
walls and vaults with paintings. He was elected one of
the municipal council or priori of his native town, and
finally rose to the supreme office of gonfaloniere. He died
at Florence on 27th June 1574.


Personally Vasari was a man of upright character, free
from vanity, and always ready to appreciate the works of
others: in spite of the narrow and meretricious taste of
his time, he expresses a warm admiration of the works of
such men as Cimabue and Giotto, which is very remark-
able. As an art historian of his country he must always
occupy the highest rank. His great work was first
published in 1550, and afterwards partly rewritten and
enlarged in 1568, bearing the title Delle Yite <M piu Ec-
cellenti Pittori, Smltori, ed Architettori. It was dedicated
to Cosimo de' Medici, and was printed at Florence by the
Giunti; it is a small quarto illustrated with many good
woodcut portraits. This ediiio princeps of the complete
work is usually bound in three volumes, and also contains
a very valuable treatise on the technical methods em-
ployed in all branches of the arts, entitled Le Tre Arti
del Disegno, cioi Arrhiteltura, Pittura,'e Scoltura.


The best edition of Vaaari's works is that published at Florence
by Milancsi, 1878-82, which embodies the valuable notes in the
earlier edition by Le Monnier. The Lives has been translated into
French, German, and English (by Mrs Foster, London, 1850).
They are written in a very pleasant style, interspersed with amusing
stones, and are in the main trustworthy, except some of the bio-
graphies of early artists.1 With a few exceptions Yasari's judgment
is acute and unbiassed.


VASCO DA GAMA. See Gama, Vasco da.


1 Vasari gives a sketch of his own biography at the end of his
ViU, and adds further details about himself and his family in his
lives of Lazzaro Vasari and Francesco Sal via ti. He was related to
the painter Luca 8ignorelli.


s As in most other kindred subjects the tendency of modern criti-
cism is to underestimate the historical accuracy of Vaaari's work.