WALTON, Brian (1600-1661), bishop of Cheater,
and editor of the great London Polyglott Bible, was born
at Seymour, in the district of Cleveland, Yorkshire, in 1600.
He went to Cambridge as a sizar of Magdalene College in
1616, migrated to Peterhouse in 1618, was bachelor in 1619,
and master of arts in 1623. After holding a school master-
ship and two curacies he was in 1626 made rector of St
Martin's Orgar in London (1626), where he took a leading
part in the contest between the London clergy and the
citizens about the city tithes, and compiled a treatise on
the subject, which is printed in Brewster's Collectanea,
1752. His conduct in this matter displayed his ability,
but his zeal for the exaction of ecclesiastical dues was
remembered to his hurt in 1641 in the articles brought
against him in parliament, which appear to have led to the
sequestration, of his very considerable preferments.1 He
was also charged with Popish practices, but on frivolous
grounds, and with aspersing the members of parliament
for the city. Up to this time he was perhaps more an
active ecclesiastic than an eager student. In 1642 he was
ordered into custody as a delinquent; thereafter he took
refuge at Oxford, and ultimately returned to London to
the house of Dr Fuller, dean of Ely, whose daughter Jane
was his second wife. In this retirement he planned and
executed his great work, a Polyglott Bible which should
be completer, cheaper, and provided with a better critical
apparatus, than any previous work o? the kind (see Poly-
glott). The proposals for the Polyglott appeared in 1652,
and the book itself came out in six great folios in 1657,
having been printing for five years. England had at this
time a band of Biblical and Oriental scholars of unusual
distinction, and Walton could reckon among his active
helpers Usher, Lightfoot, and Pococke, Castle, Wheelock,
and Patrick Young, Hyde, Thomas Greaves, and others of
less note. The great undertaking was supported by liberal
subscriptions, and Walton's political opinions did not de-
prive him of the help of the Commonwealth; the pape»
used was freed from duty, and the interest of Cromwell in
the work was acknowledged in the original preface, part
of which was afterwards cancelled to make way for more
loyal expressions towards that restored monarchy under
which Oriental studies in England immediately began to
languish. To Walton himself, however, the Reformation


1 Ho was from January 1636-36 rector of Sandon, in Essex, where
his first wife, Anne Claxton, is buried. He appeors to have also been
a prebendary of St Paul's, and for a very short time he bad held the
rectory of St Giles in the Fields.







OCR Output









342 W A L — W A N




brought no disappointment. He was consecrated bishop
of Chester in December 1660. In the following spring
he was one of the commissioners at the Savoy Conference,
but took little part in the business. In the autumn of
1661 he paid a short visit to his diocese, and returning to
London he fell sick and died on 29th November.


Howover much Walton was indebted to hi» helpers, the Polyglott
Biblo is a great monument of industry and of capacity for directing
a vast undertaking, and the Prolegomena (separately reprinted by
Dathe, 1777, and Wranghom, 1826) show judgtnon t as wel. as learn-
ing. The same qualitios appear in Walton a Coneiderator Considered
(1669), a reply to Dr John Owon's Considcralions, who thought
that the accumulation of inatorial for the revision of the received
toxt teudod to atheism. Among Walton's works must also bo
inoutioned au Introductio ad Lcctioncm Linguarum OrietUalium
(1654, 2d od. 1655), meant to prepare the way for the Polyglott


See Honry J. Todd, ifemoirt of the Life and Writings of Walton, London, 1821,
In 3 rola., of which the second contains a reprint of Walton's anawor to Owon.