WATSON, Richard (1737-1816), bishop of Llandaff,
*aa bom in August 1737 at Heversham, in Westmorland,
and was the son of the master of the grammar school of
that place. He was entirely educated by his father, who
sent him in 1754 to Trinity College, Cambridge, with "a
considerable stock of classical learning, a spirit of per-
severing industry, and an obstinate provincial accent."
He was elected a fellow of Trinity in 1760, and about the
¦ame time had the offer of the post of chaplain to the
factory at Bencoolen. "You are too good," said the
master of Trinity, "to die of drinking punch in the torrid
^*V' and Watson, instead of becoming, as he had flattered




himself, a great Orientalist, remained at home to be
elected professor of chemistry, a science of which he did
not at the time possess the simplest rudiments. "I buried
myself," he says, "in my laboratory, and in fourteen
months read a course of chemical lectures to a very full
audience." Not the least of his services was to procure
an end6wment for the chair, which served as a precedent
in similar instances.


In 1771 he became a candidate for the regius pro-
fessorship of divinity, and at the age of thirty-four gained
what he calls " tha first place for honour in the university,"
"and," he adds, "exclusive of the mastership of Trinity
College, I have made it the first for profit. / I found it not
worth £330 a year; it is now (1814) worth £1000 at
the least." He did not entirely renounce the study of
chemistry: in 1768 ho had published Inslitutiones Metal-
lurgies, intended to give a scientific form to chemistry by
digesting facts established by experiment into a connected
.series of propositions. In 1781 he followed this up with
a volume of Chemical Essays, which Davy told De Quincey
remained as late as 1813, after all recent discoveries,
unsurpassed as a manual of introductory discipline. But
on the day on which he composed his preface he burned
all his chemical manuscripts, and never returned to the
subject. His course as professor of divinity was no less
decisive. "I reduced the study of divinity into as
narrow a compass as I could, for I determined to study
nothing but my Bible." He produced several anonymous
pamphlets on the liberal side in the subscription con-
troversy and other topics of the day, and some sermons,
one of which was thought likely to have involved him in
a prosecution, but which, Dunning said, contained "just
such treason as ought to be preached once a month at St
James's." It is said to have prevented his obtaining
the provostship of Trinity College, Dublin. In 1776 he
answered Gibbon's chapters on Christianity, and had' the
honour of being one of the only two opponents whom
Gibbon treated with respect. In 1781 he was prostrated
with a malignant fever, from the effects of which ho never
wholly recovered, and which served as an excuse for that
neglect of many duties which remains the chief stain upon
his character. He had always opposed the American War,
and when the accession of Lord Shelburne' to power in
1782 afforded the then unfrequent opportunity of advanc-
ing a Liberal in politics and religion to a bishopric, Watson
was made bishop of Llandaff, being permitted to retain
his other preferments on account of the poverty of the see.
Shelburne, he says, expected great service from him as a
pamphleteer, but Watson proved from the ministerial
point of view a most impracticable prelate. He imme-
diately brought forward a scheme for improving the con-
dition of the poorer clergy by equalizing the incomes of
the bishops, the reception of which at the time may be
imagined, though it was substantially the same as that
carried.into effect by Lord Melbourne's Government fifty
years later. Watson now found that he possessed no
influence with the minister, and that he had destroyed his
chance of the great object of his ambition, promotion to a
better diocese. Neglecting both his see and his professor-
ship, to which latter he appointed a deputy described as
highly incompetent, he withdrew to Calgarth Park, in his
native county, where he occupied himself largely in form-
ing plantations and the improvement of agriculture. He
nevertheless frequently came forward as a preacher and a
speaker in the House of Lords, but his only very con-
spicuous appearance before the public was his warm
Bupport of the prince of Wales's unqualified claim to the
regency on the insanity of the king in 1788, which com-
pleted his disgrace at court In 1796 he published his
Apology /or the Bibl*.t in answer to Thomas Paine, at







OCR Output









412 W A T—W A T




present the best known of his numerous writings. It was
most effective in its day; in ours Christianity would
hardly be attacked or defended by the arms employed by
either disputant Undismayed by the displeasure of the
court, or perhaps hoping to overcome it, Watson continued
to exert his pen with vigour, and in general to good
purpose, denouncing the slave trade, advocating the union
with Ireland, and offering financial suggestions to Pitt,
who seems to have frequently consulted him. In 1798
his Address to the People of Great Britain, enforcing
resistance to French arms and French principles, ran
through fourteen editions, but estranged him from many
old friends, who accused him, probably with injustice, of
aiming to make his peace with the Government In 1807
the advent of a Whig ministry almost brought the coveted
preferment within reach. Had Dr Markham died a few
months sooner Watson would have been archbishop of
York. Such a disappointment might palliate the querulous
strain of his conversation and published references to
himself, though it could not render it dignified or decorous.
De Quincey, however, who knew the bishop personally in
his latter years, while severely criticizing his complaints,
allows that his temper had not been soured by disappoint-
ment "His lordship was a joyous, jovial, and cordial
host" He died on July 2, 1816, having occupied his
latter years in the composition and revision of an autobio-
graphy, which, with all its egotism and partiality, is a
valuable work, and the chief authority for his life.


As an advocate of liberal principles in church and state, Watson
stands almost alone among the prelates of his day; and it cannot be
said that his longing for preferment^violent and unbecoming as
it was, seduced him into mean actions or unworthy compliances.
His character is high enough to make it cause for regret that it
should stand no higher, as it easily might if ho had possessed a
nicer sense of dignity and had not measured success so exclu-
sively by the attainment of wealth and station. Hard-headed and
pushing, he yet had an intellectual conscience ; the two main ele-
ments of his character stood In each other's way: he failed as a
courtter, and did not leave a wholly unblemished reputation as
a patriot. As a bishop he neither was nor endeavoured to be
anything; as an ecclesiastical statesman it was his misfortune to
have been born fifty years too soon. His massive but unoriginal
intellect is justly characterized by De Quincey as "robust and
commonplace." (R. O.)