WATT, Jambs (1736-1819), the inventor of the
modern condensing steam-engine, was born at Greenock
on the 19th of January 1736. His father was a small
merchant there, who lost his trade and fortune by unsuc-
cessful speculation, and James was early thrown on his
own resources. Having a taste for mechanics he made
his way to London, at the age of nineteen, to learn the
business of a philosophical-instrument maker, and became
apprenticed to one Morgan, in whose service he remained
for twelve months. From a child he had been extremely
delicate, and the hard work and frugal living of his London
pupilage taxed his strength so severely that he was forced
at the end of a year to seek rest at home, not, however,
until he had gained a fair knowledge of the trado and
become handy in the use of tools. Before going to London
he had made acquaintance with some of the professors in
Glasgow college, and on his return to Scotland in 1756 he
sought them out and obtained work in repairing astrono-
mical instruments. He next tried to establish himself as
an instrument maker in Glasgow, but the city guilds
would not recognize a craftsman who had not served
the full term of common apprenticeship, and Watt was
forbidden to open shop in the burgh. The college, how-
ever, took him under its protection, and in 1757 he was
established in its precincts with the title of mathematical-
instrument maker to the university.


Before many months Black, the discoverer of latent
heat, then lecturer cn chemistry, and Bobison, then a
student, afterwards professor of natural philosophy, became




his intimate friends, and with them he often discussed tie
possibility of improving the steam-engine, of which at that
time Newcomen's was the most advanced type. The
engine was then applied only to pumping water,—chiefly
in the drainage of mines; and it was so clumsy and
wasteful of fuel as to be but little used. Some early
experiments of Watt in 1761 or 1762 led to no positive
result, but in 1764 his attention was seriously drawn to
the matter by having a model of Newcomen's engine, which
formed part of the college collection of scientific apparatus,
given him to repair. Having put the model in order, he
was at once struck with ita enormous consumption of
steam, and set himself to examine the cause of this and to
find a remedy.


In Newcomen's engine the cylinder stood vertically
under one end of the main lever or "beam " and was open
at the top. Steam, at a pressure scarcely greater than
that of the atmosphere, was admitted to the underside;
this allowed the piston to be pulled up by a counterpoise
at the other end of the beam. Communication with the
boiler was then shut off, and the Bteam in the cylinder
was condensed by injecting a jet of cold water from a
cistern above. The pressure of the air on the top of the
piston then drove it down, raising the counterpoise and
doing work. The injection water and condensed Bteam
which had gathered in the cylinder were drained out by a
pipe leading down into a welL


Watt at once noticed that the alternate heating and
cooling of the cylinder in Newcomen's engine made it
work with tedious slowness and excessive consumption of
steam. When steam was admitted at the beginning of
each stroke, it found the metal of the cylinder and piston
chilled by contact with the condensed steam and cold
injection water of the previous stroke, and it was not
until much steam had been condensed in heating the
chilled surfaces that the cylinder was able to fill and the
piston to rise. His first attempt at a remedy was to use
for the material of the cylinder a substance that would
take in and give out heat slowly. Wood was tried, but it
made matters only a little better, and did not promise to
be durable. Watt observed that the evil was intensified
whenever, for the sake of making a good vacuum under
the piston, a specially large quantity of injection water
was supplied.


He then entered on a scientific examination of the pro-
perties of steam, studying by experiment the relation of ita
density and pressure to the temperature, and concluded
that two conditions were essential to the economic use of
steam in a condensing steam-engine. One was that the
temperature of the condensed steam should be as low as
possible, 100° F. or lower, otherwise the vacuum would
not be good; the other was, to quote his own words,
"that the cylinder should be alwayB as hot as the steam
which entered it." In Newcomen's engine these two con-
ditions were incompatible, and it was not for some months
that Watt saw a means of reconciling them. Early in
1765, while walking on a Sunday afternoon in Glasgow
Green, the idea flashed upon him that, if the steam were
condensed in a vessel distinct from the cylinder, it would
be practicable to make the temperature of condensation
low, and still keep the cylinder hot Let this separate
vessel be kept cold, either by injecting cold water or by
letting it stream over the outside, and let a vacuum be
maintained in the vessel. Then, whenever communication
was made between it and the cylinder, steam would pass
over from the cylinder and be condensed; the pressure in
the cylinder would be as low as the pressure in the con-
denser, but the temperature of the metal of the cylinder
would remain high, since no injection water need touch it
Without delay Watt put this idea to the test, and found







OCR Output









W A T T .413




that the separate condenser did act as he had anticipated.
To maintain the vacuum in it ho added another new
organ, namely, the air-pump, the function of which is to
remove the condensed steam and water of injection along
with any air that gathers in the condenser.


To further his object of keeping the cylinder as hot as
the steam that entered it, Watt supplemented his great
invention of the separate condenser by several less notable
but still important improvements. In Newcomen's engine
a layer of water over the piston had been used to keep it
steam-tight; Watt substituted a tighter packing lubricated
by oil. In Newcomen's engine the upper end of the
cylinder was open to the air; Watt covered it in, leading
the piston rod through a steam-tight stuffing-box in the
cover, and allowed steam instead of air to press on the top
of the piston. In Newcomen's engine the cylinder had no
clothing to reduce loss of heat by radiation and conduction
from its outer surface; Watt not only cased it in non-con-
ducting material, such as wood, but introduced a steam-
jacket, or layer of steam, between the cylinder proper and
an outer shell. All these features were specified in his
first patent, in words which have been quoted in the article
Steam-Engine, vol. xxii. p. 475 (q.v.).


This patent was not obtained till January 1769, nearly
four years after the inventions it covers had been made.
In the interval Watt had been striving to demonstrate the
merits of his engine by trial on a large scale. His earliest
experiments left him in debt, and, finding that his own
means were quite insufficient to allow him to continue
them, he agreed that Dr Roebuck, founder of the Carron
iron-works, should take two-thirds of the profits of the
invention in consideration of his bearing the cost. An
engine was then erected at Kinneil, near Linlithgow, where
Roebuck lived, and this gave Watt the opportunity of
facing many difficulties in details of construction. But
the experiments made slow progress, for Roebuck's affairs
became embarrassed, and Watt's attention was engaged
by other work. He had taken to surveying, and was fast
gaining reputation as a civil engineer. In 1767 he was
employed to make a survey for a Forth and Clyde canal,
—a scheme which failed to secure parliamentary sanction.
This was followed during the next six years by surveys
for a canal at Monkland, for another through the valley
of Strathmore from Perth to Forfar, and for others along
the lines afterwards followed by the Crinan and Caledonian
Canals. He prepared plans for the harbours of Ayr, Port-
Glasgow, and Greenock, for deepening the Clyde, and for
building a bridge over it at Hamilton. In the course of
this work he invented a simple micrometer for measuring
distances, consisting of a pair of horizontal hairs placed in
the focus of a telescope, through which sights were taken
to a fixed and movable target on a rod held upright at
the place whose distance from the observer was to be
determined. The micrometer was varied in a number of
ways; and another fruit of his ingenuity about the same
time was a machine to facilitate drawing in perspective.


Meanwhile the engine had not been wholly neglected.
Watt had secured his patent; the Kinneil trials had given
him a store of valuable experience; Roebuck had failed,
but another partner was ready to take his place. In 1768
Watt had made the acquaintance, through his friend Dr
Small, of Matthew Boulton, a man of energy and capital,
*ho owned the Soho engineering works at Birmingham.
Boulton agreed to buy Roebuck's share in the invention,
and to join Watt in applying to parliament for an Act to
prolong the term of the patent. The application was
•uccessful. In 1775 an Act was passed continuing the
patent for twenty-five years. By this time the inventor
had abandoned his civil engineering work and bad settled
in Birmingham, where the manufacture of steam-engines




was begun by the firm of Boulton and Watt. The
partnership was a singularly happy one. Boulton had the
good sense to leave the work of inventing to Watt, in
whose genius he had the fullest faith; on the other hand,
his substantial means, his enterprise, resolution, and
business capacity, supplied what was wanting to bring the
invention to commercial success.


During the next ten years we find Watt assiduously en-
gaged in developing and introducing the engine. Its first
and for a time its only application was in pumping; it was
at once put to this use in the mines of Cornwall, where
Watt was now frequently engaged in superintending the
erection of engines. Further inventions were required to
fit it for other uses, and these followed in quick succession.
Watt's second Bteam-engine patent is dated 1781. It de-
scribes five different methods of converting the reciprocat-
ing motion of the piston into motion of rotation, so as to
adapt the engine for driving ordinary machinery. The
simplest way of doing this, and the means now universally
followed, is by a crank and fly-wheel; this had occurred to
Watt but had meanwhile been patented by another, and
hence he devised the "sun and planet wheels " and other
equivalent contrivances. A third patent, in 1782, con-
tained two new inventions of the first importance. Up to
this time the engine had been single-acting; Watt now
made it double-acting; that is to say, both ends of the
cylinder, instead of only one, were alternately put in com-
munication with the boiler and the condenser. Up to this
time also the steam had been admitted from the boiler
throughout the whole stroke of the piston; Watt now intro-
duced the system of expansive working, in which the ad-
mission valve is closed after a portion only of the stroke is
performed, and the steam enclosed in the cylinder is then
allowed to expand during the remainder of the stroke,
doing additional work upon the piston without making
any further demand upon the boiler until the next stroke
requires a fresh admission of steam. He calculated that,
as the piston advanced after admission had ceased, the
pressure of the steam in the cylinder would fall in th,e
same proportion as its volume increased,—a law which,
although not strictly true, does accord very closely with the
actual behaviour of steam expanding in the cylinder of an
engine. Recognizing that this would cause a gradual
reduction of the force with which tho piston pulled oi
pushed against the beam, Watt devised a number of con-
trivances for equalizing the effort throughout the stroke.
He found, however, that the inertia of the pump-rods in
his mine engines, and the fly-wheel in his rotative engines,
served to compensate for the inequality of thrust sufficiently
to make these contrivances unnecessary. His fourth patent,
taken out in 1784, describes the well-known "parallel
motion," an arrangement of links by which the top of the
piston-rod is connected to the beam so that it may either
pull or push, and is at the same time guided to move in a
Bensibly straight line. "I have started a new hare," he
writes to Boulton in June of that year; "I have got a
glimpse of a method of causing a piston-rod to move .up
and down perpendicularly by only fixing it to a piece of
iron upon the beam, without chains or perpendicular guides
or untowardly frictions, arch-heads, or other pieces of
clumsiness. I think it a very probablo thing to succeed,
and one of the most ingenious simple pieces of mechanism
I havo contrived."


Still a later invention was the throttle-valve and centrifugal
s;ovornor. by which tho speed of rotative engines was automatically
controlled. One more item in the list of Watt's contributions to
tho development of tho steam-engine is too important to bo passed
without mention: the indicator, which draws a diagram of tho
relation of the steam's pressure to its volumo as tho stroke proceeds,
was first used by Boulton and Watt to measure tho work dono by
their engines, and so to give a basis on which the charges levied







OCR Output









414 . WAT- -WAT




from their customers were adjusted. It would be difficult to ex-


rrate tho part which this airaplo littlo instrument lias played in
evolution of tho Btcam*cngino. Tho eminently philosophic
notion of an indicator diagram is fundamental in tho theory of
thermodynamics; tho instrument itself is to tho steam-engincor
what tho stethoscopo is to tho physician, and more, for with it ho
not only diagnoses thi ailments of a faulty machine, whether in
one or another of its organs, but gauges its powor in health.


The commercial success of the engine was not long in being
established. By 1783 all but ono of tho Newcomcn pumping-
engines in Cornwall had been displaced by Watt's. Tne mines
were then far from thriving; many wero oven on tho point of being
abandoned through tho dimculty of dealing with largo volumes of
water; and "Watt's invention, which allowed this to bo done at a
moderate cost, meant for many of them a now lease of life. His
engine used no moro than a fourth of tho fuel that had formerly
been needed to do the same work, and tho Soho firm usually claimed
by way of royalty a sum equivalent to ono-third of tho saving—a
sum which must havo been nearly equal to the cost of the fuel
actually consumed. Rival manufacturers came forward, amongst
whom Bull and Hornblower are tho most conspicuous names.
They varied tho form of tl» engine, but they could not avoid in-
fringing Watt's patent by the use of a soparate condenser. When
action was taken against them on that ground, they retaliated by
disputing the validity of the fundamental patent of 1769. In tho
case of Boulton and Watt v. Bull the court was divided on this
point, but in an action against Hornblower thepatent was definitely
affirmed to be valid by a unanimous finding of the Court of King's
Bench. This was in 1799, only a year before tho monopoly ex-
pired, but tho decision enablod tho firm to claim a large sum as
arrears of patent dues. In connexion with these trials Watt him-
self, as well as his early friends Black and Bobison, drew up
narratives of tho invention of the steam-engine, which aro of much
interest to tho student of its history.1


Before Watt's timo the stcam-engino was exclusively a steam-
pump, slow-working, cumbrous, and excessively wasteful of fuel.
His first patent made it quick in working, powerful, and efficient,
but still only as a steam-pump. His later inventions adapted it
to drive machinery of all kinds, and left it virtually what it is to-
day, save in three respects. In respect of mechanical arrangement
the modern engine differs from Watt's chiefly in this, that the
beam, an indispensable feature in the early pumping-engines, and
one whicb held its placo long after tho need for it nod vanished,
has gradually given way to more direct modes of connecting tho
piston with the crank. Another difference is in the modem use of
nigh-pressure steam. It is remarkablo that Watt, notwithstanding
the fact that his own invention of expansivo working must bavo
opened his eyes to tho advantage of high-pressure steam, declined
to admit it into his practice. Ho persisted in tho use of pressures
that were little if at all above that of tho atmosphere. His
rivals in Cornwall were not so squeamish. Trevithick ventured
as far as 120 lb on tho square inch, and a curious episode in the
history of the stoam-engine is an attompt which Boulton and
Watt made to havo an Act of Parliament passed forbidding the
uso of high pressure on the ground that the lives of the public wero
endangered. Tho third and only other respect in which a great
improvement has been effected is in tho introduction of compound
expansion. Hero, too, one cannot but rcgrot to find the Soho firm
hostile, though the necessity of defending their monopoly makes
their action natural enough. Hornblower had in fact stumbled
on the invention of tho compound engine, but as his raachino
employed Watt's condenser it was suppressed, to be revivod aftor
some years by Woolf. Id one of his patents (1784) Watt describes
a steam-locomotive, but ho never prosecuted this, and when
Murdoch, his chiof assistant (famous as the inventor of gas-light-
ing), made experiments on tho same lines, Watt gavo htm littlo
encouragement. Tho notion thon was to uso a steam-carriago on
ordinary roads; its use on railways had not yet been thought of.
When that idea took form later in the last years of Watt's life, tho
old man refused to smilo upon his offspring; it is even said that
Watt put a clause in the lease of his house that no steam-carriage
should on any pretext be allowed to approach it


On the expiry in 1800 of the Act by which the patent
of 1769 had been extended, Watt gave up his share in the
business of engine-building to his sons, James, who carried
it on along with a son of Boulton for many years, and
Gregory, who died in 1804. The remainder of his life
was quietly spent at Heathfield Hall,2 his house near


1 Another narrative of the utmost interest was written by Watt in
1814 in the form of a footnote to Robison's articlo *'Steam-Engine,"
from the fomrth edition of the Encyclopaedia Brilannica, which Watt
revised before it was reprinted in the collected edition of Robison's
works. See Robison's Mechanical PhiloBOphy, voL il


1 His workroom at Heathfield (now in tho possession of Mr




 




Birmingham, where ho devoted hip time, with scarcely an
interruption, to mechanical pursuits. Bis last work TO
the invention of machines for copying sculpture,—one for
making reduced copies, another for taking facsimiles by
means of a light stiff frame, whicb carried a pointer over
the surface of the work while a revolving tool fixed to the
frame alongside of the pointer cut a Corresponding surface
on a suitable block. We find him in correspondence with
Chantrey about this machine not many months before his
death, and presenting copies of busts to his friends as tho
work "of a young artist just entering on his eighty-third
year." His life drew to a tranquil close, and the end came at
Heathfield on the 19 th of August 1819. His remains -were
interred in the neighbouring parish church of Handsworth.


Watt was twice married,—first in 1763 to his cousin
Hiss Miller, who died ten years later. Of four children
born of tho marriage, two died in infancy; another was
James, who succeeded his father in business; the fourth
was a daughter who lived to maturity, but died early,
leaving two children. His second wife, Miss Macgregor,
whom he married before settling in Birmingham in 1775,
survived him; but her two children, Gregory and a
daughter, died young.


Somes of Watt's minor inventions have been already noticed.
Another, which has proved of great practical value, was the letter-
copying press, for copying manuscript by using a glutinous ink «D(1
pressing the written page against a moistened sheet of thin paper.
He patented this in 1780, describing both a roller press, tho uso
of which he seems to havo preferred in copying his own corre-
spondence, and aleo tho form of screw press now found in every
merchant's office.


In the domain of puro science Watt claims recognition not only
as having had ideas greatly in advance of bis age regarding what
is now called energy, but aa a discoverer of the composition of
water. Writing to Priestley in April 1783, with reference to some
of Priestley's experiments, no suggests the theory that "water is
composed of depnlogisticated air aud phlogiston deprived of part of
their latent or eloruentary heat." It is difficult to determine the
exact meaning attached to these antiquated terms, and to say how
far Watt's suggestion anticipated the fuller discovery of Cavendish.
Watt's viows were communicated to tho Royal Society in 1783,
Cavendish's experiments in 1784, and both are printed in tho
same volumo of the Philosophical Transactions.


The early and middle part of Watt's life was a long struggle
with poor health: severe headache prostrated him for days at i
timo; but as he grew old his constitution seems to have become
moro robust. His disposition was despondent and shrinking; ho
speaks of himself, but evidently with unfair severity, as " indolent
to excess." "I am not enterprising," he writes; "I would rather
face a loaded cannon than settle an account or make a bargain; in
short, I find myself out of my sphere when I havo anything to do
with mankind.' He was a man of warm friendships, and has left
a personal memorial of the greatest interest in his numerous letters
to Dr Small and others. They aro full of sagacity and insight:
his own achievements aro told with a shrewd but oxtremoly modest
estimate of their value, and in a stylo of remarkablo terseness and
lucidity, lightenod hore and thcro by a touch of dry humour. In
his old ago Watt is described by his contomporarios as a man
richly stored with tho roost varions knowledge, full of anecdote,
familiar with most modern languages and their literature, a great
talkor. Scott speaks of " tho alert, kind, benovolent old man, his
talents and fancy overflowing on evory subject, with his attention
alivo to every ono's question, his information at every ono's com-
mand."


See J. P. Mult head, Origin and ProQreu 6/Iht Mechanical Invent tone »/J<M


Watt, 3 roll.. 1854 (vol*. 1. nnd 11. contain a memoir and Watt', letters; rot'DL
plrcs a reprint of lit* patent specifications and other papers); Muirhcsd, Ufeof
Watt, 185H ; Smiles, Lirei of Boulton and Watt; Williamson, Memorial! of the
Lineage, Ac, of Jama Walt, published by tho Watt Club. Greenock, 1856; Com-
ipondenee of Iht laid Jamct Watt on hit bitcoeers of tk* Theory of tho CompoiUto*
of Water, edited by Mulrhcad, IMC: Cowper, "On the InTcntlons of James Watt
and his Models preserved at Ilsndsworlh and South Kensington," Pros. /est.
Mech. Eng., 1883; articlo "Watt" in tho Enevclopextia Briiannica, Cth edition
(1823), by Jnmos Wstt, Junior ; Roblson, Mechanical Philotophn, voL 1L, ISO
(loiters and notes by Watt on the History of the Steara-EngtDCJi (J. A. £.)