ZURBARAN, Francisco (1598-1662), a distinguished
Spanish painter, was born at Fuente de Cantos in
Estremadura on 7th November 1598. His father was
named Luis Zurbaran, a country labourer, his mother Isabel
Marquet. The lot apparently marked out for Francisco
was that of tilling the ground, like his father; but his
natural faculty had decided otherwise. In mere childhood
he set about imitating objects with charcoal; and his
father was quick-witted and long-headed enough to take
him off, still extremely young, to the school of Juan-de
Roeias in Seville. Francisco soon became the best pupil
in tho studio of Ro&as, surpassing the master himself; and
before leaving him he had achieved a solid reputation, full
though Seville then was of able painters. He may prob-
ably have had here the opportunity of copying some of
the paintings of Michelangelo da Caravaggio; at any rate he
gained the name of "the Spanish Caravaggio," owing to
the very forcible realistic style in which he excelled.
He constantly painted direct from nature, following but
occasionally improving on his model; and he made gi tat use
of the lay-figure in the study of draperies, in which he was
peculiarly proficient. He had a special gift for white
draperies; and, as a natural consequence, Carthusian monks
are abundant in bis paintings. To these rigidly faithful
methods of work Zurbaran is said to have adhered through-
out his career, which was always eminent and prosperous,
wholly confined to his native Spain, and varied by few
incidents beyond those of his daily laborious and continu-
ally productive diligence. His subjects were mostly of- a
severe and ascetic kind,—religious vigils, the flesh chastised
into subjection to the spirit,—the compositions seldom
thronged, and often reduced to a single figure. The style
is more reserved and chastened than Ciaravaggio's, the tone
of colour often bluish to a morbid excess. Exceptional
effects are attained by the precise finish of foregrounds,
largely massed out in light and shade. Zurbaran married
in Seville Leonor de Jordera, by whom he had several
children. Towards 1630 he was appointed painter to
Philip IV.; and there is a story that on one occasion the
sovereign laid his hand on the artist's shoulder, saying,
"Fainter to the king, king of painters." It was only late
in life that Zurbaran made a prolonged stay in Madrid,
Seville being the chief scene of his operations. He died
in 1662'in Madrid.


In 1627 he painted the great altarpieca of St Thomas Aquinas,
now in tbe Seville museum; it was executed for the church of the
college of that saint in the same city. Vbis is Zurbaran's largest
composition, containing figures of Christ and the Madonna, various




ing beyond the size or life; this work is full of fine portrait-Ilk
heads, and it ranks, both in importance and in elevated style, as
the painter's masterpiece. It had been preceded by the numerous
pictures of the screen of St Peter Nolasco in the cathedral. In the
church of Guadalupe he painted various large pictures, eight ot
which relate to the history of St Jerome, ana in the church of St
Paul, Seville, a famous figure of the Crucified Saviour, in grisaille,
presenting an illusive effect of marble. In 1633 he finished the
paintings of the high altar of the Carthusians in Jerez. In the
palace of Buenretiro, Madrid, are four large canvases representing
the Labours of Hercules, an unusual instance of non-Christian
subjects from the hand of Zurbaran. A very fine specimen is in
the London National Gallery, a whole-length life-sized figure of a
kneeling Franciscan holding a skull (figured in voL xxi. p. 440,
fig. 36).


The principal scholars of this master, whose style has as much
affinity to that of Ribera as to Caravaggio's, were Bernabe de
Ayala and the brothers Polanco.