
ADAMS, Samuel, American statesman, born at Boston,
Sept 27, 1722, was second cousin to John Adams. He
studied at Harvard,'but, owing to his father's misfortunes
in business in connection with a banking speculation,—the
•" manufactory scheme,"—he had to leave before complet-
ing his course, and to relinquish his intention of becoming
a Congregational clergyman. He received his degree,
however, and it is worthy of note, as showing the tendency
of Ms political opinions, that his thesis was a defence of
the affirmative reply to the question, "Whether it be law-
ful to resist the supreme magistrate, if the commonwealth
cannot otherwise be preserved I" The failure of the bank-
ing scheme above referred to, in consequence of the limita-
tions imposed by English law, made Adams still more
decided in his assertion of the rights of American citizens,
and in his opposition to Parliament. He gave up his
business, in which he had little success, and became tax-




collector for the city of Boston, whence he was called by


his political opponents, " Samuel the publican." In all the
proceedings which issued at lost in tho declaration of
independence Adams was a conspicuous actor. He took
part in the numerous town meetings, drafted the protest
which was sent up by Boston against the taxation schemo
of Qrenville (May 1764); and, being chosen next year a
member of the general court of Massachusetts, soon becamo
one of tho leaders in debate. Upon his entry into the
House he was appointed clerk, and had thus much influ-
ence in arranging the order of business and in drawing up
papers. Attempts were more than onco mado by the
English governor to win him over by the offer of a place,
but Adams proved inflexible. Hia uncompromising resist-
ance to the British Government continued; he was a
prominent member of tho continental Congress at Phila-
delphia, and was one of those who signed the Declaration
of Independence in 1776. He was a member of the con-
vention which sottlcd the constitution of Massachusetts,
and becamo president of its Senate. From 1789 to 1794
he was lieutenant-govei nor of the State, and governor
from 1794 to 1797, retiring in the latter year partly on
account of age, but partly also because the Federalists were
thon in the ascendant, and he himself was inclined to tho
Jefferson or Republican party. He died on the 3d Oct
1803. In an oration on American independence, delivered
in Philadelphia, 1st Aug. 1776, Adams characterises the
English as "a nation of shopkeepers." Tho oration was
translated into French, and published at Paris; and it is
therefore not unlikely that Napoleon's use of this phrase
was not original.
