

CALLOT, Jacques (1593-1635), a French eugravor,
was born in 1593 at Nancy in Lorraine, where his father
was a herald at arms. He early discovered a very strong
predilection for art, and at the age of twelvo quitted home
without his father's consent, and set out for Rome, where
ho intended to prosecute his studies. Being utterly
destitute of funds he joined a troop of Bohemians, and
arrived in their company a. Florence. In this city he had
tho good fortune to attract the notice of a gentleman of the
court, who supplied him with tho means of study; but he
removed in a short time to Rome, where, however, he was
recognized by some relatives, who immediately compelled
him to return home. Two years after this, and when only
fourteen years old, he again left France contrary to the
wishes of his friends, aud reached Turin before he was over-
taken by his elder brother, who had been despatched in
quest of him. As his enthusiasm for art remained
undiminished after these disappointments, he was at last
allowed to accompany the duke of Lorraine's envoy to the
Papal court. His first caro was to study the art of design,
of which in a short time he became a perfect master.
Philip Thomasin instructed him in the uso of the graver,
which, however, ho ultimately abandoned, substituting the
point as better adapted for his purposes. From Rome he
went to Florence, where he remained till the death ol
Cosmo It., the Maecenas of these times. On returning to
his native country he was warmly received by the then
duke of Lorraine, who admired and encouraged.him. As
his fame was now spread abroad in various countries of
Europe, many distinguished persons gave him commissions
to execute. By the Infanta Isabella, sovereign of the Low
Countries, he was commissioned to engrave a design of the
siege of Breda; and at the request of Louis XIII. he
designed the siege of Rochelle, and the attack on the Isle
of RS. When, however, in 1631, he was desired by that
monarch to execute an engraving of the siege of Nancy,
which he had just taken, Callot refused, saying, "I would
rather cut off my thumb than do anything against the
honour of my prince and of my country;" to which Louis
replied—that the duke of Lorraine was happy in possessing
such subjects as Callot. Shortly after this he returned to
his native place, from which the king failed to allure him
with the offer of a handsome pension. He died in 1635 at
the age of forty-two. He engraved in all about 1600 pieces,








the best of which are those executed in aquafortis. No
ore ever possessed in a higher degree the talent for group-
ing a large number of figures in a small space, and of repre-
senting with two or three bold strokes tho expression,
action, and peculiar features of each individual Freedom,
variety, and na'iotti characterize all his piecss. His
Fairs, his Miseries of War, his Sieves, his Temptation of
St Anthony and his Conversion of St Paul will be sought
after and admired as long as there are artists to learn and
a public to appreciate.

