
CLEANTHES, a Stoic philosopher, born at Assos in
Asia Minor, about 300 b.c, was originally a boxer. He
first listened to the lectures of Crates the Cynic, and then
to those of Zeno, the Stoic, supporting himself meanwhile
by working all night as water-carrier to a gardener. His
apparent idleness aroused suspicion, and he was summoned
before the Areopagus; but when his story became knowu
the court offered him a present of ten mines, which he
refused to accept His power of patient endurance, or
perhaps his slowness, earned him the title of the Ass;
but such was the esteem awakened by hia high moral
qualities that, on tho death of Zeno in 263, he became the
leader of the school He still, however, continued to
support himself as before by the labour of his own hands.
Among his pupils were hia successor, Chrysippus, and
Antigonus, king of Macedon, from whom he accepted 2OO0
minss. The story of his death, which took place about 220
or 225 B.c, is thus related. Being troubled by an nicer,
he had been directed to fast for a short time, but when
that time had expired, he. still refused to eat on the ground
that he was now half-way on the road to death, and need
not take tho trouble of twice performing the journey.


Cleanthes produced very little that was original, thongh he wrote
some fifty works, of which fragments have corns down to us. The


C' ucipal is the large portion of the Hymn to Jupiter which has
a preserved in Stobteas. He regarded the snn as the abode of
God,, the intelligent providence, or (In accordance with Stoical
materialism) the vivifying fire or aether of the universe. Virtue,
he taught, is life according to nature; hut pleasure is not according
to nature. He also originated a new theory as to the individual
existence of the human soul; for he held that the degree of iu
vitality after death depends upon the degree of its vitality in this
life. The principal fragments of Cleanthes's works are contained
in Diogenes Laertius and Stobseua ; some may be found in Cicero
and Seneca. See Zollor, Stoics, Epicureans, and Sceptics; and
Ritter, Gexhichle der Phtioaophie.
