
COMBE, William (1711-1823), an anonymous back
writer of great fertility and of some merit, was born at
Bristol in 1751. The circumstances of his birth and parent
age are somewhat doubtful, and it is questioned whether
his father waB a rich Bristol merchant, or a certain William
Alexander, a London alderman, who died in 1763. Be
this as it may, it is certain that Combe was educated at
Etna, with Fox, Lyttelton, and William Beckford; that
Alexander bequeathed him some £2000—a little fortune
that soon disappeared in a course of splendid extravagance,
which gained him the nickname oi Count Combe; and
that he finally fixed his'residence in Loudon (about 1771),
as a law student and bookseller's hack. In 1775 he pub-
lished The Philosopher in Bristol, a series of essays of
merely local interest; and in 1776 he made his first success
in Londou with The Diaboliad, a satire full of bitter person-
alities. Four years afterwards (1780) he became an inmate
of the King's Bench; and much of his subsequent life was
spent'in prison. He appears to have written a correspon-
dence between Sterne and Eliza Draper, and also the Letters
of the Late Lord Lyttelton (1780;. Periodical literature of
all sorts—pamphlets, satires, burlesques, "two thousaud
columns for the papers," "two hundred biographies," The
Origin of Commerce—filled up the next years, and about
1789 Combe was receiving £200 yearly from Pitt Six
volumes of a Devil on Two Sticks in England caused him
to be saluted as "the English Le Sage;" in 1794-96 he
wrote the text for Boydell's History of the Rim- Thames;
in 1803, he was placed on The Times. In 1807 All the
Talents, a satire, appeared; it ran through twenty editions
and is generally attributed to Combe. In 1809-11 he
wrote for Ackermann's Political Magazine the famous Three
Tours of Dr Syntax, which, owing greatly to Bowlandson's
designs, had an immense success. Then came poems in
illustration of drawings by Princess Elizabeth, The Military
Adventures of Johnny Newcome (1815), The English Dance
of Death (1815-16), The Dance of Life (1816-17), The
Adventures of Johnny Qua Genus (1822)—all written for
Bowlandson's caricatures ; together with Histories of Oxford
and Cambridge, Picturesque Tours along the Rhine and
other rivers, Histories of Madeira, Antiquities of York,
texts for Turner's Southern Coast Views, and contributions
innumerable to the Literary Repository. In his later years,
notwithstanding a by no means unsullied character, Combe








nan courted for the sake of his chainiiug conversation aud
inexhaustible stock of anecdote. He is said to hare written
and burned Vis autobiography; but it does not appear that
the loss of this memorial is to be regretted. He died in
Loudon in 1823.


Brief obituary memoirs of *V.mbe appeared in Ackcrmann's
Library Repository and in the Gentleman s ifagazinr for Anguat
1823 J anil in May 1859 a list of hia works, drawn up by his own
baud, was printed in the latter periodical. See also Diary of
II. Crabb Jlobinson, Notes and Queries for 1869, and a paper in
the Churchman's Shilling Magazine for the same year.

