

DICKENS, Charles (1812-1870), the great English
novelist, was what would generally be described as a self-
educated man, and yet, if by a man's education we under-
stand preparation for the work he has to do in life, he was
indebted to circumstances for an education on which it
would have been difficult to improve. His father was a
clerk in the Navy Pay Office, stationed at Portsmouth
when Charles was born, but soon afterwards at Chatham,
and soon after that in London,—a conscientious man,
industrious and punctual in his occupation, but too easy
tempered and unpractical to expend his income so as
to keep pace with the wants of a rapidly increasing family.
The boy's mother seems to have been a person of more
energy, as well as of considerable accomplishments; she
taught him the rudiments of Latin, and tried to establish
a boarding school in Gower Street. The one parent was
the original of Micawber, the other the original of Mrs
Nickleby. With all their united efforts they could not
keep out of distress; the boarding school scheme came too
late; and when Dickens was nine years old the family
was living in abject poverty in Bayham Street, Camden
Town, then one of the poorest London suburbs, and their
difficulties were increasing upon them. Charles was sent
out to earn six shillings a week in a blacking warehouse,
tying blue covers on pots of paste-blacking. For two years
the child led a very hard, uncared-for life at this uncon-
genial work. He bitterly felt that it was uncongenial for
he was a very precocious boy, had read many books, and
had formed au ambition to be "a learned and distinguished
ban.'' It must have been very galling to him, with his




prematurely developed sensibilities and aspirations, to be
thrown among such companions as Bob Fagin and Poll
Green. And perhaps he was right in afterlife to wonder
at the thoughtlessness of his parents in subjecting him to
such a humiliation. His sufferings were so acute, and
made such an impression on him, that years afterwards ho
could not think of them without crying; and there were
certain quarters of the town through which he used to pass
to his daily work, and where he used to loiter with less than
enough to eat, that he habitually shunned for their painful
memories. "It is wonderful to me," he wrote when in the
height of his fame, " how T could have been so easily cast
away at such an age. It is wonderful to me that, even
after my descent into the poor little, drudge I had been
since we came to London, no one had compassion enough
on me—a child of singular abilities, quick, eager, delicate,
and soon hurt, bodily or mentally—to suggest that some-
thing might have been spared, as certainly it might have
been, to place me at any common school. Our friends, I
take it, were tired out No one inader any sign. My
father and mother were quite satisfied. They could hardly
have been more so if I had been twenty years of age, dis-
tiuguished at a grammar school, and going to Cambridge."


And indeed, if his parents could have foreseen the future,
they would have had cause to be much more satisfied. For
when the fragile little boy was sent into his cousin's
blacking warehouse, he entered a better school, as it
happened, than his father could have chosen for- him. It
was an infinitely more painful school than Harrow or Eton,
but for one w hose destined work was to describe the poorer
houses and streets of London, and the many varieties of
life, odd and sad, laughter-moving and pitiful, that
swarmed in them, it was a more instructive school, it was
the true road to knowledge. The chances were that a
delicate boy like him succumbed to his wretchedness, and
that a clever boy like him became a rogue and vagabond;
but he survived these dangers and became a great novelist.
Instead of sinking into the depths of the thronging atoms,
he rose above them, or kept apart from them, observed
them, and became their describer.


It is impossible to say how this watchful habit began,
and when it connected itself with his love of literary dis-
tinction. We have Dickens's own testimony that ho was
a singularly observant child, and that at a very early period
he had an ambition to become " a learned and distinguished
man," but it would be going too far to suppose that from
his childhood he held himself apart and kept a keen eye on
the doings of others with a view to making capital out of
his observations. At first in all likelihood the distinction
which he coveted was a kind of distinction that seemed to
him possible only through the medium of grammar-schools
and universities. To the last no doubt he regretted this
want of academical study, and believed that it had placed
him at a disadvantage. Still accident is so very much
better a schoolmaster than design, that from the first it
gave him also the literary training needful to make him
a painter of manners. His father, the navy pay clerk, had
a small collection of books, with which the "very small and
not over-particularly taken care of boy " had made himself
familiar while he was living at Chatham, before his experi-
ences in Camden Town and the blacking warehouse.
Among these books were Roderick Random, Peregrine
Pickle, Humphrey Clinker, Tom Jones, the Vicar of Wake-
field, Don Quixote, Oil Bias, Robinson Crusoe, the Arabian
Nights, Mrs Inchbald's Farces, and the Tales of the Genii.
This literature did not glide over the boy's mind like water
over marble; it found congenial soil, and fell into it as
seed. He lived the life of his favourite characters. 1 " I
have been Tom Jones," he says, putting his own case into
the mouth of David Copperfield "(a child's Tom Jones, a








harmless creature), for a week together. I have sustained
my own idea of Roderick Random for a mouth at a stretch,
I verily believe. I had a greedy relish for a few volumes
of voyages and travels—I forget what now—that were on
these shelves; and for days and days I can remember to
have gone about my region of our house, armed with the
centre-piece out of an old set of boot-treeB, the perfect
realization of Captain Somebody of the Royal British navy,
in danger of being beset by savages, and resolved to sell his
life at a great price." And then follows something still more
suggestive, as showing his tendency to connect these ideal
creations with the world of sense around him. "Every
barn in the neighbourhood, every stone in the church, and
every foot of the churchyard had some association of its
own in my mind, connected with these books, and stood for
some locality made famous in them. I hare seen Tom
Piper go climbing up the church steeple; I have watched
Strap, with the knapsack on his back, stopping to rest him-
self upon the wicket gate; and I know that Commodore
Trunnion held that club with Mr Pickle in the parlour of
our little village alehouse." Even thus early, too, he tried
to imitate what he read, wrote a tragedy founded en one of
the Tales of the Genii, and acquired great fame in his own
circle as a teller of stories.


A boy with this preliminary training was excellently
prepared for a course of strange and painful experiences.
The bitter contrast between the ideal world in which he
had lived, and the miserable poverty in which he spent the
first three years of his life in London, making himself use-
ful at home, running errands, carrying things to the pawn-
brokers, visiting his father in the Marshalsea, into which
the poor man and his family soon drifted, tying up pots of
blacking at the warehouse, prowling about oook-shops,
h-la-mode beef-shops, and coffee-shops, a Bhabbily clad and
insufficiently fed little boy, seeking to invest his livelihood
of a shilling a day to the best advantage, helped to fix these
experiences and the many odd scenes and characters with
which they brought him in contact more indelibly on his
memory. According to his own account, intensely as he
felt the misery and shame of this kind of life, he was not
without a perception of its humorous side. He used to say
that, incredible as it might appear, he looked upon things
then very much as he did afterwards. He even began to
make attempts to sketch what he saw. Colman's Broad
Grins was lent him by some kind people—another wise
provision on the part of the great schoolmaster Accident;
and with this before him as a stimulus, he actually sketched
the barber who came to shave his bachelor uncle, the old
charwoman who helped his mother, and laid the founda-
tion of subsequent sketches,—Mrs Pipchin, the little
Marchioness, Bob Sawyer's lodgings, and many other char-
acters and scenes to which we have not the same direct
traces. He was pursuing his education, in fact, as
thoroughly as if he had been a pupil in a painter's studio.
He was serving his apprenticeship. He could not have
been better employed if he had been the holder of an
endowment for research.


Dickens himself by no means looked upon it in that
light. It was with difficulty, twenty-five years afterwards,
that he could bring himself to speak of this period of his
life. In his eyes it was a miserable servitude, from which
he was happily relieved by a quarrel between his father
and one of the partners in the warehouse when he was
rather more than twelve years old, and sent to a school in
Mornington Place, where he consorted with more respect-
able boys, and had some chance of book learning. If his
father's fortunes had been equal to it, he might now
have passed through a regular course of grammar-school
and university training, and thereby perhaps been in-
capacitated for the work to which he was called. But




fortunately Lo was soon again thrown clikfly i-n his own
resources. At the age of fifteen he was engaged as au
office-boy by an attorney in Gray's Inn at a salary of 13s.
6d., and afterwards 15s. a week. Here again he had a
good field for observation, and did not fail to use it, for
his employer afterwards recognized in Pickwick and Nickleby
several incidents that took place in his office, and professed
also to identify some of the characters. With Mr Black-
more he remained for eighteen months. During that time
his father became a newspaper parliamentary reporter, at.d
the office-boy, who had lost none of his thirst for distii.c-
tion, and speut all his spare time reading hard in the
British Museum, resolved to qualify himself for a similar
occupation. He mastered the difficulties of short-hand,
and in November 1828 obtained employment as a reporter
in Doctors' Commons. He spent two years reporting law
cases, practising in Doctors' Commons and the other law
courts. It would be difficult to conceive a more perfect
way of completing the education of the future novelist,
giving nim an insight into the strange by-paths of that
higher stratum of society of which he had before had little
experience. At the age of ninotcen he entered the parlia-
mentary gallery to enlarge his knowledge still further. He
was a reporter of political speeches in and out of Parlia-
ment for five years from 1831 to 1836. First he reported
for the True Sun, then for the Mirror of Parliament,
, finally for the Morning Chronicle. In his excureiuns iuto
the country, and back with his " copy," he saw the last of
the old coaching days and of the old inns that were a part
of them; but it will be long, as Mr Forster remarks,
"before the readers of his living page see the last of the
life of either."


His first published piece of original writing appeared in
the Old Monthly Magazine for January 1834. The title
was " A Dinner at Poplar * ("Mr Minns "), one of the pieces
afterwards published as Sketches by Boz, the nom de plume
which he adopted from the nickname of one of his brothers.
He wrote nine of these sketches for the Mont lily Magazine,
and then he was engaged to write some for an evening
offshoot to the Morning Chronicle. The first series of
Sketches by Boz was collected and published in two volumes
iu the February of 1836, with illustrations by George
Cruickshank. The first edition was exhausted in a few
months; a second was called for in August. The Sketches
had at once attracted attention. No wonder, for in them
we find already in full swing the unflagging delight in
pursuing the humorous side of a character, and the inex-
haustible fertility in inventing ludicrous incidents, which
had only to be displayed on a large scale to place him at
once on a pinnacle of fame. There are many of them,
such as the Parish, the Boarding House, Mr Minns and his
Cousin, and the misplaced attachment of Mr John Dounce,
which show Dickens's humour at its very richest. He had
formed, too, by this time his characteristic likes and
dislikes, and plays them off upon his butts and favourites
with the utmost frankness. The delight in homely socia-
bility and cheerfulness, in the innocent efforts of simple
people to make merry, the kindly satire of their little vani-
ties and ambitions, the hearty ridicule of dry fogies who
shut themselves up in selfish cares and reserves, and of
seur mischief-makers who take pleasure in conspiring
against the enjoyment of their neighbours,—these tenden-
cies, which remained with Dickens to the last, are strongly
marked in the Sketches, though lighter-hearted in their
expression than in his later works. The mark and indis-
pensable condition of all great work is there, that which Mr
Carlyle calls veracity—the description of what the writer
has himself seen, heard, and felt, the fearless utterance of
his own sentiments in his own way.


The first number of The Posthumous Papers of the








Pickwick Club was Issued in April 1836. The story of its
origin was first authentically told in the preface to the edi-
tion oM 847. Some of the- details were afterwards slightly
modified. The- first thought of the work did not originate,
with Dickens, although the. whole character of it was deter-
mined by him. The publishers, Messrs -Chapman & Hall,
and Mr Seymour the artist, had agreed to issue a monthly
serial to be illustrated by Mr Seymour, and they went to
Dickens, whose Sketches had attracted their attention, to
propose- that he should write the letterpress of this
"monthly something." Their idea was that the author
should describe the adventures of a " Niinrod Club," the
members of which should go out shooting, fishing, and so
forth, and getting themselves into difficulties through their
want of dexterity. Dickens undertook the monthly some-
thing, but obtained tha required diverting incidents by a
different machinery, namely, the Pickwick Club. The first
four numbers went off slowly j the demand first 'became
"brisk" after the fifth number, in which Sam Wcller made
his appearance. But by the discerning few the value of
the work was recognized; and one of them, Mr Bentley the
publisher, only a few weeks before fame came "to-the author
with its capricious aud overwhelming suddenness, engaged
him to undertake the editing of a monthly magazine to be
started the following January, and to write a serial story
for it, and further made an agreement with him for the
writing of two other tales at a Specified early date. Of-the
vexation arising out of this agreement, when the huge suc-
cess ef the Ficjctpick Paper* showed its terms to be inade-
quate, and Dickens was disposed to resent it as a selling of
himself into slavery, and of the manner in which the
bargain was re-adjusted, an account is given by MrForster
from the author's point of view. Nine monthly numbers
of the Pickwick Papers were published in 1836; eleven
mere in -1837; by November of the latter year the sale had
reached 40,000 copies,- Pickwick had become a popular hero
and godfather to innumerable articles of merchandise, and
Sam Weller's sayings were catchwords in the street and
the household wherever the English language was spoken.


In the first excitement of success, the young author's
appetite for work was unbounded. In 1837 he wrote his
monthly instalments of the Pickwick Papers and Olivet
Twist side by side, not even by a week in advance of the
printer with either. They kept him fully occupied, and
held in abeyance for that year a taste which from his
youth to the end of his career was strong in him, and had
no inconsiderable influence.upon his-style as a painter of
manners. In his childhood at Chatham he got his first
experience of fame as the author .of a tragedy; at the
school in Mornington Place he and his companions mounted
small theatres and acted Small plays; When in the attorney's
office in Lincoln's Inn Fields he frequented minor theatres,
the nature of which he has caricatured in the Sketches; and
not unfrequently engaged in parts; one of his fkst published
sketches," Mrs Joseph Porter Over the Way," is a descrip-
tion of private theatricals in a stage-struck family. In 1836,
before his serial engagements multiplied, he wrote a farce
called the Strange Gentleman, and a short comedy with songs
called the Village Coquettes. It is strange that with this
passion for the stage, which he always retained, he should
not have written more plays. He probably felt that in
this kind of composition he had but the use of his left
hand, aud did not care to risk his reputation where he had
no field for those powers, of description and narrative over
which he had proved his mastery. But though he did not
write plays, and finally sought no outlet for his theatrical
longings except in amateur acting and in reading from his
own novehr, the habit of realizing incidents as they would
appear on the stage is unmistakably apparent in his work.
He constantly seems to be working up scenes to the pitch




of stage effect, elaborating, the actions of his characters ae
if he were inventing "business." for a player, suggesting,
in fact, an exuberance of business far beyond the capabilities
of any human performer.


We doubt whether the fact that Dickens did not write
playsis explained by saying that his genius was descriptive
and narrative, but not .dramatic. There is plenty of the
raw -material of dramatic action in his dialogues. He
probably could have written a good acting 'play if he had
tried. His characters are essentially theatrical, though
their story is told according to the laws of the novel, -and
not according to the laws of the drama. The. explanation
of his not having tried to write plays we take to be simply
that he discovered full employment for his powers in
another direction before he had applied himself to the art
of constructing plays.. Dickens was eminently a practical
man, and, when publishers were fighting for his novels, he
directed his whole energy to meeting the demand without
seeking to experiment on other modss of composition. ■ As
some compensation to Mr Bentley for releasing him from
the strict terms of- the agreement we have mentioned, he
edited a life of Griinaldi, which was published in 1838;
but after that he put his whole strength into the art of
.writing sketches and serial tales. - As .soon as Pickwick was
off his hands, and Jbefore Oliver Twist was-yet completed)
he made an agreement with Chapman Si Hall "'to write a
new work, the title whereof should bo determined by him;
of a similar character and of. the same extent as the
Posthumous Papers of the Pickwick Club;" and between
April 1838 and October 1839 he produced the Life and
Adventures of Nicholas Nicklely,


Before the end of the serial pubtfeation-of McEeby, he
had conceived a new project, partly with a view to relief
from the strain of writing a continuous stdry in instalments
with the printer at his heels, and partly with a view to
getting' more profit .for himself out of his labours. This
was a weekly publication, to f>e edited by himself, and to
contain sketches, essays, tales, adventures, and letters from
imaginary correspondents. He was to receive a certain sum
every.week for what was written, and Was besides to share
half the profits with the publishers. • When the scheme was
agreed to by the publishers, be proceeded to release him-
self from other engagements by resigning the editorship of
Bentley's M'iscdlany, and getting clear of his obligation to
write Barnaby Budge for Mr Bentley in consideration
of his buying the copyright a'nd stock of Oliver Twist for
£2250. He thus Btartsd clear with Master Humphrey's
Clock, the title upon which he fixed for his pew publication.
The first number Of Master Humphrey vtpa issued on April
4, 1840. The sale of the first number was 70,000 copies,
but the orders fell off when it was found that there was to
be no continuous story. A story in weekly instalments it
was Thereupon necessary for him to write. A tale which
he* had begun in hisf magazine, and put into the mouth of
Old Humphrey, was seen to be capable of expansion, and
he expanded it into the Old-Curiosity Shop, finding him-
self thus driven to his old employment of keeping ahead of
the printers with a serial story, the only difference being
that the instalments were weekly, and that he had tho
stimulus of larger profits from his success.


It is necessary in any account of Dickens, if we care to
understand his method as a novelist, to give prominence to
the conditions-under which he worked All that has been
said about the want of plot in his novels finds its true ex-
planation in those conditions. We need not-search for
deeper causes. His stories being published in instalments,
it was indispensable to success that each separate part
should have an independent interest; and as each instal-
ment was published before the next was written, it was
necessary tliat he should have a plot leaving him with the








ctnrost possible freedom of action. Of course, when we
say that this explains his method, we do not mean that it
accounts for his success; we do not mean to detract from
the marvellous genius. that enabled him to write with
success under such conditions. We are only concerned
to show how i,iie kind of plot-that he adopted, and the
numerous branches, offshoots, and meanderings which he
permitted himself were imposed upon him by circumstances
of publication and composition,—were, in fact, necessary to
success under those circumstances. A great deal too much
has been made of the want of plot in Dickens's novels, as
if it were a weakness, as if he had been incapable'of con-
structing a plot,—the truth being that his method was
deliberately adopted as that best suited to the position in
which he found himself. It is evident that he was very
much exercised over this question of plot, as indeed he was
on all points touching his art The Pickwick Papers may
be put on one side in studying his method; he tumbled as
it were into writing them; "no ingenuity of plot," as he
himself explained, "was attempted;" they were simply
"designed for the introduction of diverting characters and
incidents." [n his subsequent novels, if the Pickwick
Papers can be called a novel, he could lay his plans before-
hand, and consider how far-it was possible to reconcile the
introduction of interesting characters and incidents with
greater regularity of structure, and he never seems to have
solved the problem to his own satisfaction. In Oliver Twist
he adopted the method of Defoe, and wrote what may be
called a biographical novel, the hero of which is involved in
a series of complications, arising one after another without
being foreseen and calculated for from the beginning. In
this way he avoided committing himself too far in advance
to engagements which might afterwards prove embarrassing;
the toils are laid for Oliver and cleared away more than
once in the course of the story. In Nicholas Niekleby he
reserved similar freedom of action by making Ralph
conspire to ruin his brother's children without committing
himself at the outset to any particular scheme as the
villain's one resource; he thus also makes provision for a
series of plots, one after another, and secures a certain
unity for the whole by making them all proceed from
one malevolent agency, whose motive was formed before
the story began. In Nicltolas Niekleby, however, he
departs from certain restraints/under which he had laid
himself in the construction of Oliver Twist; he asserts
greater freedom from the bit and bridle of plot in his
introduction of diverting incidents which have no proper
connection with the main story. Miss La Creevy and the
Kenwigses ate brought in on the slightest of pretexts,
slighter even than that which serves for the introduction
of the Mantalinis and the Crummies family. But no one
can quarrel with a breadth of canvas which the author i3
able to fill with such figures; the critic can only say that
he would have made a mistake if he had limited himself
from the scope thereby given for his powers. As in
Niekleby the moving principle of the story is the malevolent
humour of Ralph, so in the- Old Cariosity Shop the moving
principle is the malevolent humour of Daniel Quilp. It is
characteristic of Dickens that the uncalculating impulses
should have eo much influence in the direction of his stories.
Fagin has some amount of selfish object in his designs
against Oliver Twist; but Ralph and Quilp have nothing
to gain by their conspiracies except the gratification of pure
malice. _ The couuter-agencies to these simple incarnations
of the devil are equally disinterested. Oliver's good angel
Nancy, Kate Nickleby's Newman Noggs, Little Nell's
Kit, aod Kit's Dick Swiveller are swayed by impulses of
pure generosity. Observe, too, the analogous positions of
Mr Brownlow the protector of Oliver, the Cheeryble
brothers the protectors of Nicholas, and Mr Garland the




protector of Kit. It is a game between the elementary
passions, in which the good triumphs.


Master Humphrey's Clock was allowed to run out in
November 1841, with the conclusion of the tale of Barnaby
Pudge, which followed the Old Curiosity Shop. The con-
struction of Barnaby Pudge is less simple than that of any
of its predecessors; Dickens here attempted a more closely
knit form of plot. There are no incidental diversions in
this novel, all the characters have some finger in the main
story, and every scene tends towards the development of
some relation which afterwards has a potent influence on
the course of the main events. It is true the Lord George
Gordon riots fill so much space as to eclipse for a time tha
private interests of the novel; but the lives of all the
personages whose fortunes we are following are interwoven
with the public history with the most elaborate care and
consummate skill, and when our fears for the commonwealth
iu the general storm are allayed, the keenest interest is left
for the fates of the individuals that have been involved in
the commotion. ,


Barnaby Pudge cost the author much labour, and after
finishing it, and with it Master Humphrey's Clock, he felt
the need of some change of strain. He had begun to
chafe under the weekly form of publication, and fret as to
what he might have done with Barnaby if he could only
have produced it in monthly instalments. This determined,
him to make an agreement with his publishers for the issue
of his next story in the old monthly form. When he pro-
jectedjhe Clock, one of his schemes was that he should
visit Ireland or America, and write from there a series of
descriptive papers for it The Clock was discontinued, but
the desire to seek fresh fields remained. He accordingly
set out for America in Jauuary 1842, returning in June,
after a reception which might well have' turned his head, to
write the American Notes. He had been ,run after and.
stared at by crowds, and cheered with greater enthusiasm
than if he had been a crowned potentate; and the peopls
of the United States complained that in these Notes, as
well as in his fierce endeavours to enlighten them on tha
subject of copyright, he had made but a poor return for
their welcome. He was superfluously aggressive, there is
no doubt; but they freely forgave him when he returned
some years afterwards.


From whatever cause, the sale of the first number of
Martin Chuzdewit (January 1843), in which he returned
to the broad and free method of Nickleby,-oxx\j seeking a
new motive for his plot in the design of a severe but bene-
volent old uncle for his nephew's reformation, and the
schemes of-a pious hypocrite, fell considerably below what
he had been led to expect by the sale of his former month-
lies. Only 20,000 were sold; his publishers, with whom
he had made a very advantageous bargain, irritated him by
grumbling; and though the novel obtained still higher
praise than any of its predecessors, he was disappointed and
discontented, and began to revolve other plans for making
a living by his pen. He conceived the idea of writing a
Christmas tale, the Christmas Carol; but he made much
less profit by the enterprise than he made by similar tales
afterwards, when he charged less for them and appealed to
a wider audience. Although he sacrificed nothing of his
individuality in the substance of the tale, and it was
no failure in point of reputation, the pecuniary side of the
work was for the moment uppermost in his mind, for, large
as his income had been, he had exceeded it, and the most
popular author of his time was suffering horrors, as he
himself said, of " intolerable anxiety and disappointment."
This disappointment determined him to live abroad for a
time, partly to reduce his expenses, and partly to store his
mind with fresh material. He settled at Genoa, and there
finished Chvtzlcwit, and wrote the Chimes, his Christmaa








tale for 1844, making a brief -visit to England to read, it to
a party of friends and arrange for its publication. He
visited the principal towns of Italy in the first months of
1845, returning to England byway of Switzerland in June,


His first work on returning to London was to project a
new weekly, to be called the Cricket, "price three half-
pence, if possible—partly original, partly select, notices of
books, notices of theatres, notices of all good things) notices
of all bad ones; earol philosophy, cheerful views, sharp
anatomization of humbug, jolly good temper, papers always
in seasonfcpat to the time of year; and a vein of glowing,
hearty, generous, mirthful, beaming reference in everything
to home and friends." The scheme for the time fell
through. About'the same time he. "opened communica-
tions with a leading member of the Government to ascer-
tain what chances there might be for his appointment,.
upon due qualification, to the paid magistracy of London;
but the reply did not give him encouragement to entertain,
the notion farther." Soon after he was' asked to undertake
the editorship of a new daily paper,' the Daily News, and
consented. But a fortnight's experience (fr6m .January 21
to February 9,1846) satisfied bim that he was out of his
element. He then resolved to go abroad again, and write'
another novel in shilling monthly numbers. The fruit of
this resolution was Dombey and Son, the first number of
which was issued in October 1846, and the last in April
1848.* On resigning the editorship of the Daily News, he
did not wholly part connection witn it; he continued in.it
from January to March 1846 a series .of descriptive.letter's,
which he' afterwards-published under the title of pictures
from Italy. The sale of Dombey, which reached 32,000,
reassured him in the pursuit of his special calling. • He
followed it up. in 1849 and 18'50 with David Copperfield.


There is not much room for variety of incident in the life
of & novelist securely established in popular favour,, work-
ing hard, and happy in the exercise of his art' When we
have mentioned that Bleak House appeared in monthly
numbers, from March 1852 to September 1853, Little
Dorrit from December 1855 to June 1857, Our Mutual
Friend horn. May 1864 to November'1865, we have given
the chief incidents in the later half of the literary life of
Dickens. He was much too restless a man, however, to
settle down into a steady routine of work. He was nst
content to appear before the public only in monthly num-
bers. He stuck steadily enough to work-in wjrich he had
proved his mastery, but yet be had always a craving for
new experiences, and was always planning new enterprises.
While David Copperfield was still upon his hands. he
returned to his old notion of a weekly periodical. At first
he thought of calling it The Shadow, making it contain, as
it were, the observations of "a kind of semi-omniscient,'
omnipresent, intangible creature,"'" which should go into
any place, by sunlight, moonlight, starlight, firelight,
candlelight, and be in all houses, and all nooks and
corners, and be supposed to be cognizant of everything,
and go everywhere, without the least, difficulty; which
might be in the theatre, the palace, the House of Commons,
the prisons, the unions, the churches, on the railroad, on
the sea, abroad, and at home." But oq consideration he
abandoned this idea, and chose the title Household Words.
The first number appeared in March 30, 1850. In House-
hold:Words, besides contributing short stories to the annual
Christmas number, Dickens wrote Hard Times between
April 1-and August 12, 1854. In 1859, inconsequence of
a quarrel between the editor- and the publishers, Household
Words was discontinued, and All the Year Bound,
practically the same periodical under a new title, took its
place. In All tfie Year Round, besides Christmas con-
tributions, Dickens wrote A Tale of Two Cities between
April 30 and November 26, 1859; the Uncommertial




Traveller, between January 28 and October 13, 1860 ;.and
Great Expectations between December 1; 18§0, and August
3, }861. It is often made a question whether there was
any falling off of power in the later works "of Dickens
David Copperfield would generally be named as the novel
in which his power was at its zenith. The question is not
one that can be answered by an unqualified yes or no.
There is certainly no falling.off ini descriptive power.' The>
idiom of his dialogue is finer; tha wit is'perhaps keener
and more swift. His characters .are mose sharply defined;
the force with which they are drawn is more delicate. In
.no poii)t of the novelist's art, whether in the general con-
struction or in the execution of details, is there any sign of
failing power;' on the contrary the power seems to have
become firmer and more sure from practice. Does the
fault then lie with the reader 1 Is it that we have.grown
tired of his jnanner 1 This is probably part of-the reason,
but yet it "is not to be denied that we'miss something in
the later works. We laligli less ovefr "the pages. There,
are longer "intervallums" of seriousness. Humorous
characters are still there in abundance; Joe Gargery, Old
Boffin, Silas-Wegg,-Rumty Wilfer, Septimus Crisparkle,
Durdles', Mr Sapsea, are as irresistible as. any of their pre-
decessors. But on the whole there is less exuberance of
animal bpirits. The fun is not s.o unflagging. It is even
less hearty, for there is. mixed with out" laughter-something
of contempt Qr pity for the object of it. Not that it is all
laughter and* undesigning diversion in any of the earlier
works. Dickens belonged to a' -serious and moralizing
generation ; he came in with the Reform Bill,' and partook
largely of the moral spirit of its framers. Even in the
joyous Pickwick Tapers th.ere" is a serious blow at prison
abuses. Oliver Twist is almost- as didactic as one of
Harriet Martineau's tales, before writing Nicholas
Nicklebyho went down to Yorkshire like a * Government
commissioner to inquiro into the abuses of the Yorkshire
schools. Through all the fresh and b'oistetous fun.of bis
earlier works, there .was an almost declared doctrine that
it is bnr duty to laugh, a soft of protest in favour of
laughter, and a denunciation of the dismal as a crime.
The same genial .doctrine runs also through his-later w.orks,
but it is urged with i trace of.bitterness, and with a greater
sensitiveness td die evil principles that^oppose it. Dickens
was not written out, but he was growing old-,- and the
animal spirits which fed the flame of his marvellous
humour began to show symptoms of exhaustion. The
quality of his humour was unimpaired, but the quantity
habl suffered diminution,


Dickens established his first weekly periodical from a
desire to draw closer the relations between himself and hia
readers. He_ drew those relations still closer in 1658, by
beginning a series of public readings <5f his own works.
He had long hungered for this way of giving body and
substance to his feeling of success. He had always -been
eager for the immediate and palpable triumphs of the stage.
The idea of taking a hall or theatre and reading from his
own books was first mentioned by him in 1844, after he
had read the Chimes to a small company in Mr Forster's
rooms, and he often' returned to it, but was obliged to hold
it in abeyance for fourteen years, his friends urging that it
.would be beneath his dignity. Ip 1858 his resolution was
taken in spite of all discouragements, partly, he said,
to escape from uneasiness at home, though it may well br>
believed that his own temper—restless', irritable, and
exacting in the. midst of his work—was largely to blame
for the discomfort from which he suffered He gave four
series of readings, in 1858-59, 1861-63, 1866-67, and
lSe&^O, appearing in nearly every town of any size in the
United Kingdom; and in 1867—68 renewing in this way
his acquaintance with the Americans. The success of








these readings was enormous from every point of view.
Mr Forster mentions that he remitted from America
£10,000 odd as the result of 34 readings.


That Dickens should so long have abstained from
appearing as a public reader of his own works, and stand-
ing face to face with his audience to enjoy the delight of
their effect, notwithstanding his strong desire to do so, is
a significant fact. It gives a sort of measure of two
things,—the force of his craving for sympathy and applause,
and the extent of his patience under conventional preju-
dices. It was from deference to these prejudices that he
abstained; and it required an almost fierce effort on his
part to dismiss those prejudices 03 " humbug," and " the
proprieties of old women." His attitude towards society,
in the narrow sense of the word, was always peculiar. To
understand it, we ma«t bear iu mind the circumstances of
his youth. He seems never to have quite lost a lurking
fear that those circumstances exposed him to contempt.
He was much too proud and great-hearted a man to give in
to such a fear; but it clung to him, and was always
demanding a certain struggle to keep it down. Slight as
the struggle was, the traces of it ace perceptible in his
work. We have an evidence of it in the common saying
that he never succeeded in painting "a gentleman." That
is not to be got over by calling for a definition of the word;
it is a popular expression of a fact, the fact that nearly all
the personages in his novels occupying a position in life to
which that word would have been applied in his own time
are painted in unfavourable colours. Perhaps the Course
of his stories did not call upon him to paint more favour-
able specimens of that class; still the fact remains that in
Dickens's attitude towards society there was something of
the defensive, even of the aggressive. He faced towards
society with a certain air of defiance, with the conscious-
ness of a vast popular multitude behind him, to which he
could appeal if they refused him what was his due. He
never claimed more than his due, and it was never refused
to him. It is perhaps for this reason that the traces of his
spirit of revolt against society are so slight as to be more
matter of inference than of observation. It is more correct
to say that he never tried to paint " a gentleman," than
that he did not succeed. The question can hardly be raised
without giving it undue importance, an importance which
Dickens himself would have been the first to make light
of; for, though he had his full share of the little vanities
inseparable from humanity, he was a great man in temper
as well as in genius, and littlenesses were of the accidents
and not of the essence of his nature.


Dickens's want of perfect sympathy with the cultured
society of his time incapacitated him for that kind of novel
which answers to comedy in dramatic composition, although
it left him free for work of a greater and more enduring
kind. What may be called the comedy novel, the novel of
Thackeray in Dickens's generation, is much less sure of
enduring fame, because the sentiments on which it rests,
being the product of a particular knot of circumstances, are
more fugitive, and pass sooner into the province of the
historian. The novels of Dickens will live longer because
they take hold of the permanent and universal sentiments
of the race,—sentiments which pervade all classes, and which
no culture can ever eradicate. His fun may be too
boisterous for the refined tastes of his own time, or; for
the matter of that, of posterity; his pathos may appear
maudlin; but they carried everything before them when
they first burst upon our literature, because, however much
exaggerated, they were exaggerations of what our race feels
in its inner heart; and unless culture in the future works
a miracle, and carries its changes beneath the surface, we
may be certain that Dickens will keep his hold.


If Dickens had been asked why his novels were likely to




live, he would probably have answered that it was because he
put more work into them than any of his contemporaries.
He was fond of insisting that genius meant attention. The
definition may be accepted with a qualification. No man
can become a genius by resolving to attend; but if he attends
very much in some one direction by natural impulse, then
he may be said to have a genius, whatever may be his
field of work. No genius is of much avail for great literary
productions without attention. Dickens could, never have
gathered together his amazing variety of characters and
abundance of incidents without attention. M. Taine. in
his criticism of Dickens, dwells much upon the boundless
wealth of his imagination; Dickens himself would have
expressed the same fact by speaking of the persistence and
closeness of his attention. It comes to the same thing in
the end, whichever way we express it; but there is no
doubt that Dickens's own expression is more descriptive of
his actual method of work. If. Taine rather gives us the
notion that Dickens sat down and trusted to the inexhaust-
ible fertility of his imagination; whereas, ready and active
as his imagination ever was, he accumulated materials for
it with the industry of a pre-Raphaelite painter. The
charm, the inimitable secret, lay, of course, iu the trans-
muting process through which dry facts passed in his
imagination; but he laboured earnestly, exercised the most
painstaking attention, not merely in bringing his facts
together, but in setting them, with all their superadded
value, for his special purposes. Dickens would have been
a humorist though'he had never written a line; he could
never have helped attending to the humorous side of
whatever met his eye; but without the attention on which
he prided himself as the secret of his power, he could never
have established himself securely as one of the greatest
humorists in literature.


Our Mutual Friend was published in 1864 and 1865.
Aiter an interval of five years, during which he contributed
to three Christmas numbers of All the Tear Round, and
wrote A Holiday Romance and George Silverman's Expla-
nation for an American publisher, the first number of
The Mystery of Edwin Drood was issued in April 1870.
He did not live to complete the novel. For some years
severe pains in the left hand and foot had given warning
that he was overtaxing his system, but the warning was
not fully understood till too late. He was suddenly over-
come by a stupor, caused by effusion on the brain, on the
evening of the 8th of June, and ceased to breathe on the
following day. In his will he had desired that he should
be buried in "an inexpensive, unostentatious, and strictly
private manner, without any public announcement of the
time or place of his burial" These conditions were
observed; but his executors did not consider them
inconsistent with his receiving the honour of interment in
Westminster Abbey, where he wag buried on the 14th
of June 1870.


His death took place at Gadshill Place, a house near the
main road between Rochester and Gravesend, which he
had bought in 1856, and which had been his home since
1859. Here he worked, and walked, and saw hjs friends,
and was loved and almost worshipped by his poorer
neighbours for miles around. His previous residences in
London had been Furnival's Inn, where fame found him
a young man writing sketches for the Chronicle; 48 Doughty
Street, after his marriage and first flood of success; Devon-
shire Terrace, from 1839 to 1851; Tavistock House, from
1851 to 1859. These residences were varied by his
numerous excursions to provincial towns, to the Continent,
to America. But "perhaps there was never a man who
changed places so much and habits so little. He was
always methodical and regular, and passed his life from
day to day, divided for the most part between working








mid walking, the same wherever he was." It Is a notable
feature in his regularity that it was never a complacent
routine; it was persisted in in spite of restless longings
which he never conquered to the last.


The authorized life" of Dickens is that by John Forater, 8 vols.
8vo, 1871-2-4. There are two books on his public readings— Charles
Dickens as a Reader, by Mr C. Kent, and Pen Photographs of his
Readings in America, by Miss Kate Field. Mr G. A. Sala has pub-
lished a valuable essay on his "Genius and Character." (W. M.)

