

DIETRICH, Christian Wilhelm Ernst (1712-177*),
was born at Weimar, where he was brought up early to the
profession of art by his father Johann Qeorge, then painter
of miniatures to the court of the grand duke. Being sent
to Dresden to perfect himself under the care of Alexander
Thiele, he had the good fortune to finish in two hours, at
the age of eighteen, a picture which attracted the attention
of the king of Saxony. Augustus II. was so pleased with
Dietrich's readiness of hand that he gave him means to
study abroad, and visit in succession the chief cities of Italy
and the Netherlands. There he learnt to copy and
to imitate masters of the previous century with a versatility
truly surprising. Winckelmann, to whom he had been re-
commended, did not hesitate to call him the Raphael of
landscape. Yet in this branch of his practice he merely
imitated Salvator Rosa, Roos, and Everdingen. He was
more successful in aping the style of Rembrandt, and
numerous examples of this habit may be found in the
galleries of St Petersburg, Vienna, and Dresden. At
Dresden, indeed, there are pictures acknowledged to be
his, bearing the fictitious dates of 1636 and 1638, and the
name of Rembrandt. Among Dietrich's cleverest repro-
ductions we may account that of Ostade's manner in the
Itinerant Singers at the National Gallery. His skill in
catching the character of the later masters of Holland if.
shown in candle-light scenes, such as the Squirrel aud the








Peep-Show at St Petersburg, where we are easily reminded
of Godfried Schalckeu. Dietrich tried every branch of art
except portraits, paiuting Italian and Dutch views alternately
with Scripture scenes and still Ufe. In 1741 he was
appointed court painter to August III. at Dresden, with an
annual salary of 400 thalers (£60), conditional on the pro-
duction of four cabinet pictures a year. This condition, no
doubt, accounts for the presence of 52 of the master's pauels
and canvases in one of the rooms at the Dresden museum.
These pieces enable the spectator, if careless of more
serious occupation, to study the numerous varieties of a
changing style. It is needless, perhaps, to add that
Dietrich, though popular and probably the busiest artist of
liia time, never produced anything of his own; and his
imitations are necessarily inferior to the originals which he
nffucted to copy. His best- work is certainly,that which he
rave to engravings, A copious collection of these at
the British Museum, produced ou the general lines of
earlier men, such'an Ostade and .Rembrandt, reveal both
spirit and skill. Dietrich, after Ms return from the
Peninsula, generally signed himself " Dietericij," and with
this signature most of his exlant pictures are inscribed.
His death took place at Dresden, after he had successively
filled the important appointments of director of the school
of painting at the Meissen porcelain factory and professor
of the Dresden academy of arts


D1EZ. Fbibdeich Cheistiam (1794-1876), the founder
of Romance philology, was born at Giessun, iu Hesse-
Darmstadt, March 15, 1794, and died at Bonn, May 29,
1876. He was educated first at the gymnasium and then
at the University of his native town. There he studied
classics under Welcker, who had just returned from a two
years' residence in Italy to fill the chair of archaaology and
Greek literature It was Welcker who kindled iu him a
love of Italian poetry, and thus gave the first bent to his
genius. In 1813 he joined the Hesse corps as a volunteer
and served iu the French campaign. Next year he returned
to his books, and this short taste of military service was
the only break in a long and nueventful life of literary
labours. By his parents' desire he applied himself for a
short time to law, but a visit to Goethe in 1818 gave a new
direction to his studies, and determined his future career.
Goethe had been reading Rnynouard's Selections from the
Romance Poets, aud advised the young scholar to explore the
rich mine of Provencal literature which the French savant
had opened up. This advice was cngerly followed, and hence-
forth Diez devoted himself to Romance literature. After
supporting himself for some years by private teaching, he
removed in 1822 to Bonn, where he held the position of
privat-docent, which is the lowest grade of the German
professoriate. In 1823 he published his first work, An
Introduction, to Romance Poetry; in the following year
appeared The Poetry of the Troubadours, aud in 18-9 The
Lives and (forks of the Troubadours. In 1830 he was
called to the chair of modem literature. The rest of his
life was mainly occupied with the composition of the two
great works on which his fame rests, the Grainmnr of the
Romance Languages, 1836-1844, and the lexicon of the
Romance Languages—-Ha/ian, SpanisJi, and French, 1853.


In these two works Diez has done for the Romance
group of languages what Jacob Grimm has for the Teutonic
family. In both cases much remains to be accomplished,
many words aud forms are not yet accounted for, some
errors have already beeu pointed out, but aU future
philologists must build on the foundations which these two
men have laid. "Nothing," says Max Miiller, " can bo a
better preparation for the study of the comparative grammar
of the ancient Aryan language than a careful perusal of the
comparative grain mar of the six Romance languages by
Professor Diez."




In order to appreciate tlie importance of Diez's work it
is necessary to take a rapid glance at the history of
philology ui France. The earliest philologists, Buch as
Perion and Henri Estienue. sought to discover the origin
of French iu Greek and even in Hebrew. For more than
a contury Menage's Etymologiod Dictionary held the field
without a rival Considering the time at which it was
written (1650), it was a meritorious work, but philology
was then in the empirical stage, and many of Menage's
derivations (such as that of "rat" from the Latin "mns,"
or of "haricot" from "faba ") have since become by-wc-ds
among philologists. A great advance was made by
Raynouard, who by his critical editions of the works of the
Troubadours, published in the first years of the present
century, laid the foundations on which Diez afterwards
built. The difference betweeu Diez's method and that
of his predecessors is well stated by him in the preface to
his dictionary. In sum it is the difference between
science and guess-work. The scientific method in to follow
implicitly the discovered principles and rules of phonology,
and not to swerve a foot's breadth from them unless plain,
actual exceptions shall justify it; to follow the genius of
the language, aud by cross-questioning to elicit its secrets;
to guage each letter and estimate the value which attaches
to it in each position; and lastly to possess the true
philosophic spirit which is prepared to welcome any new
fact, though it may modify or upset the most cherished
theory.


Such is the historical method which Diez pursues in his
grammar and dictionary. To collect and arrange facts is,
as ho tells us, the sole secret of his success, and he adds in
other words the famous apophthegm of Newton, " hypo-
theses non fingo."


The introduction to the grammar consists of two parts:
—the first discusses the Latin, Greek, aud Teutonic
elements common to the Romance languages; the second
treats of the tix dialects separately, their origin, and the
elements peculiar to each. The grammar itself is divided
into four books, on phonology, on flexion, on the formation
of words by composition and derivation, and on syntax.


His dictionary is divided into two parts. The first
contains words common to two at least of the three
principal groups of Romance,—Italian. Spanish and Portu-
guese, and Provencal and French The Italian, as nearest
the original, is placed at the head of each article. The
second part treats of words peculiar to one group. There
is no separate glossary of Wallachian.


Of the introduction to the grammar there is an excellent transla-
tion into French by Gaston Paris, a jmpil of Diez. and an English
translation by C. B. Cayler. 'fhe dictionary has been published in
a remodelled form for English readers by T. C. "Doukiu. A second
edition, enlarged and corrected, appeared In 1861, and a third
edition was begun in loS9.

