
DRUMMOND, William (1585-1649), of Hawthorn-
den, a Scottish poet of .the Spenserian school, and descen-
dant of an old family of noble blood, was born at Hawthorn-
den, near Edinburgh, on the 13th December 1585. His
father, John. Drummond, was the first laird of Hawthorn-
den; and his mother, Susannah Fowler, was well-con-
nected, her brother William being private secretary to
Queen Anne, and a man of literary tastes. Drummond
received his early education at the Edinburgh High School,
and graduated as M.A. of the recently founded (1582)
metropolitan university in July 1605. The years 1607 and
1608 were spent at Bourges and Paris in the study of
law; and, in 1609, Drummond was again in Scotland,
where, by the death of his father in the following year,
he became laird of Hawthornden at the early age of twenty-
four. The list of books he read up to this time indicates
a strong preference for the finer and more imaginative, as
distinguished from the argumentative kinds of literature.
Accordingly, on finding himself his own master, Drumiuoud
naturally abandoned law for the muses; "for," says
his biographer in 1711, "the delicacy of his wit always
run on the pleasantness and usefulness of history, aud
on the fame and softness of poetry." He was .a good
linguist, and read Latin, Greek, Italian, Spanish, French,
and Hebrew. He had already written several poems,
chiefly sonnets; and some early letters, which have been
preserved, show a fine command of pure English, as well
as Drummond's critical sagacity in abandoning the Scottish
dialect for the language raised to literary supremacy by the
illustrious Elizabethans. Drummond's first publication
appeared in 1613, and was an elegy on the death of Henry,
prince of Wales, called Teares on the Death of Maeliadts.
As might have been expected from Spenser's influence, it is
pastoral throughout Milton, in his Lycidas, has at once
imitated and surpassed this early poem of Drummond's.
In 1614 Drummond for the first time met Sir William
Alexander, known later as earl of Stirling, the author of a
ponderous poem on Doom's-day. In the following year
Drummond sustained a dreadful blow in the death of
Miss Cunningham of Barns, to whom he was engaged to be
married. In 1616, the year of Shakespeare's death, appeared
Poem*: Amor out, FuneraU, Divine, Pastcn-all: in Sonnett,
Songs, Sextains, Madrigals, being substantially the story of
his love and loss. Drummond's next poem is entitled Forth
Feasting: A Panegyric to the King's Most Excellent Majesty,
and celebrates James's visit to Scotland in 1617. In 1618
there was an interesting correspondence between Drummond
and Drayton ; and, about the close of the same year, or
about the beginning of 1619, Drummond was honoured
with a visit of a fortnight or more from the great literary
dictator of the time—Ben Jonson. Drummond, as tradition
relates, sat awaiting Jonson's arrival under the shade of a
fine sycamore, and exclaimed when Jonson came in sight,
"Welcome, welcome, • royal Ben 1 * Upon which the
dramatist rejoined, " Thank ye, thank ye, Hawthornden.*
The famous account of their conversations, long supposed
to be lost, was discovered in the Advocate's Library,
Edinburgh, by Mr David Laing, and, after being read to
the Society of Scottish Antiquaries in 1832, appeared, ten
years later, as a publication of the Shakespeare Society. The
conversations are full of interesting literary gossip, and
embody Ben's opinion of himself and of his host, whom he
frankly told that he "■ was too good and simple, and that
. oft a man's modesty made a fool of his wit"








The next few years in Drummond's life are comparatively
uneventful, being marked i-snly by correspondence with Sir
William Alexander and Drayton. In 1623, the year of a
great famine and consequent mortality in Scotland, appeared
the poet's fourth publication, entitled Flowers of Zion: By
William Drummond of Hawthornedenne: to which is
ndjoyned his Cypresse Grove. From 1625 till 1630
Drummond was probably for the most part engaged in
travelling on the Continent. In 1627, however, he seems
to have been home for a short time, as, in that year, he
appears in the entirely new character of the holder of a
patent for the construction of military machines, entitled
"Litera Magistri Gulielmi Drummond de Fabrica Machin-
arum Militarium, Anno 1627." The same year, 1627, is
the date of Drummond's munificent gift of about 500
volumes to the library of Edinburgh University. This
collection, to which Drummond afterwards made addi-
tions, is kept in a separate cabinet, and is particularly
rich in the English poets. In 1630 Drummond again
began to reside permanently at Hawthornden; and, in
1631, he received his last letter from Drayton, who died
in London on the 23d of December. In 1632 Drum-
mond married Elizabeth Logan,' by whom he had five sons
and four daughters. In 1633 Charles made his coronation-
visit to Scotland; and Drummond's pen was employed in
writing congratulatory speeches and poetry. As Drummond
naturally preferred Episcopacy to Presbytery, we are not
surprised to learn that he approved of the main object
Charles had in view in this visit, although his peace-loving
nature was averse to the means employed in establishing
Episcopacy. Drummond was a true Scottish gentleman
in his pride of blood. Partly to please the earl of Perth,
and partly to satisfy his own curiosity, the poet had studied
the1 genealogy of the family very carefully, and had given
<lue prominence to the fact that Annabella Drummond,
daughter of Sir John Drummond of Stobhall, was the queen
of Robert UL This investigation was the real secret
of Drummond's interest in Scottish history; and so we find
that he now began his History of the Lives and Reigns of
the Five Jameses, Kings of Scotland—a work which did
not appear till 1655, and is remarkable only for its good
literary style. His next work was called forth by tie king's
enforced submission to the opposition of his Scottish sub-
jects. It is entitled Irene: or a Remonstrance for Concord,
Amity, and Love amongst His Majesty's Subjects, and
embodies Drummond's political" creed of submission to
authority as the only logical refuge from democracy, which
he hated. In 1639 Drummond had to sign the Covenant
in self-protection, but was uneasy under the burden, as ex-
isting squibs by him testify. Drummond's next work
Imajiaxia: or a Defence of a Petition tendered to the Lords
of the Council of Scotland by certainNoblemenand Gentlemen,
January, 1643, is a political pamphlet in support of those
royalists in Scotland who wished to espouse the king's
cause against the English Parliament. Its burden is a
passionate invective on the intolerance of the then dominant
Presbyterian clergy; but Irene fails to do justice to the
substantial work they had done. Drummond's subsequent
works may be described briefly as royalist pamphlets, written
with more or less caution, as the times required.


After being an invalid for several months, the poet died
on the 4th December 1649, and was buried in the church-
yard of Lasswade, a neighbouring village.


The only works of Drummond which call for special notice
are the Cypresse Grove and the poems. The Cypresse Grove,
one of the noblest prose poems in literature, exhibits great
wealth of illustration, much fine thinking, a jd an extraordi-
nary command of musical English. It is an essay on the foUy
of the fear of death, and shows how much the author was
impressed with the comparative insignificance of this world.




"This globe of the earth," says he, * which seemeth huge
to us, in respect of the universe, and compared with that
wide pavilion of heaven, is less than little, of no sensible
quantity, and but as a point" (1711 edition, p. 123).
Death, he argues, from many of its accidental associations,
appears to be much more dreadful than it really is. Its
universality, and a correct estimate of human life, ought to
nerve us against the fear of death. Further, we should re-
member that death is not annihilation, but the vestibule to
immortality and a higher life. The essay, which is com-
posed throughout in a strain of lofty idealism, is cobcludbd
in the form of a vision.


A noteworthy feature in Drummond's poetry is that it
manifests no characteristic Scottish element, but owes its
birth and inspiration rather to the English and Italian
masters. This was owing partly to his anti-Presbyterian
bias and his long residence abroad j but it was also natural,
on other grounds, for a quiet, cultured, and meditative poet
to imitate the Elizabethans and the great Italian writers.
Drummond was essentially a follower of Spenser, delighting
in the description of outer nature ; but, amid all his sensu-
ousness, and even in those lines most conspicuously laden
with lustrous beauty, there is a dash of melancholy thought-
fulness—a tendency deepened by the death of his first love.


Drummond was so successful as a writer of sonnets that
he was called "the Scottish Petrarch;" and his sonnets are
still ranked immediately after Shakespeare's, Milton's, and
Wordsworth's. Most of his poems are steeped in the pre-
Copernican ideas of astronomy, and are marked by a sense
of the smallness of the visible in comparison with the
infinite lying beyond. This is one of Drummond's favourite
moods ; and he is constantly harping upon such phrases as
"the AIL" "this great AIL" Even in such of his poems
as may be called more distinctively Christian, this philoso-
phic conception is at work. Drummond's poems are distin-
guished by pensive beauty, sweetness of versification, and
richly worded descriptions, but lack vigour and originality.
Altogether this poet is to be remembered as the best re-
presentative of " sweetness and light " amid much "that was
dull and ephemeral in contemporary Scottish literature.


There are several editions of his works :—(1) Hall's edition of the
prose works, published in 1655; (2) Phillips's (a nephew of Milton)
edition of the poems, which appeared in the same year; (8) Bishop
Sage's, published, in 1711, the only complete edition of Drummond's
writings ; (4) an edition of his poems by Lord Dundrennan and
David Irving, issued in 1832; (5) Cunningham's edition of the
poems of 1833 j and (6) Turnbull's in 1857. 'The only collected
edition of the prose writings was published in 1711. Drummond's
life has been ably written by Professor Masson (1873). (T. 01.)

