

WOHLER, Friedrich (1800-1882), chemist, was born
on July 31, 1800, in Eschersheim, near Frankfort-on-the
Main. While attending the village school of Rodelheim, he
received valuable additional instruction from his father, a
man of more than ordinary acquirements. In 1812 the
family removed to Frankfort, where he entered the gym-
nasium, and by the kindness of a scientific friend, Dr
Buch, was introduced to the study of mineralogy,
chemistry, and physics. He afterwards studied medicine
at Marburg and Heidelberg, graduating in that faculty
at the latter university. Having, on the advice of Leopold
Gmelin, decided upon devoting himself henceforth to
chemistry, he completed his chemical education at Stock-
holm, under Berzelius, in whose laboratory he worked for
a considerable time, and with whom, during his subsequent
life, he maintained the most friendly relations. While'in
Sweden he took part in a scientific expedition through
Norway, which made him acquainted with the brothers
Brongniart and with Humphrey Davy.


After his return from Sweden in 1825, he accepted a
call to Berlin as teacher of chemistry in the then newly-
erected "gewerbschule," and remained there until 1832,
when family affairs caused him to take up his abode in
Cassel. In 1836 Wohler became professor of chemistry
in the medical faculty of the university of Gottingen,
which office, in his case, was combined with that of
inspector-general of pharmacy for Hanover. He held his
chair till his death, which occurred, after a short illness on
the 23rd September 1882.




Wohler's career as a chemist extends over two generation!.
Some sixty years ago, when the elementary nature of chlorine had
just been established, and the isolation of cyanogen was still a
novelty, young Wohler already worked as an investigator, the
same Wohler who rejoiced with the chemists of to-day over the
synthesis of indigo. Of the world of chemical discoveries that lie
between he magna pan fuiU Within the limits of the present
article, however, it is impossible to do more than indicate briefly
the nature of some of his greater achievements. Amongst these his
discovery of cyanic acid, and what it led him to, occupy a prominent
place. From these investigations of his the science of organir
chemistry may be said to date.


When, in 1828, Wohler prepared the ammonia salt of his acid,
he was astonished to find that the salt, although made by what
appeared to bo a straightforward doublo decomposition, did not
exhibit the character of an ammonia salt at all, but turned ont to
be identical with urea, a substance which heretofore had been
known only as one of the organic components of urine. Prior
to this discovery a wide and impassable gulf had in the mind)
of chemists separated the mineral from the organic kingdom.
Inorganic bodies all appeared to be derivable from their elements by
a succession of acts of binary combination; the full analysis of such
a body contained in itself the full instruction for its synthetical
production in the laboratory. Organic substances, on the other
hand, were supposed to be things of an entirely different order;
in them the few elements which they all consist of were assumed
to be united with one another, each with each, in a mysterious
manner, which could bo brought about only by the agency of " vital
force." Vital foroo, it was now seen, baa nothing to do with the
formation of urea at any rate. The gulf was bridged over, and a
great and new morning full of the highest promise dawned over
chemistry. If the promise waa more than fulfilled, if organic
chemistry from a men possibility developed into a reality, ws owe
this chiefly to the great researches which were carried out con-
jointly by Wohler and Liebig.


Ono of the first, if not the first, of these waa an investigation on
the oxygenated acids of cyanogen, which they published in 1830.
In their research they proved, both analytically and synthetically,
that cyanic and cyanurio acid, although distinct bodies, have the
sarao elementary composition, and that the former, when simply
kept in a aealed-up tube, gradually paases wholly into a porcelain-
like neutral solid, cyamelide, which is widely different from either
By these discoveries, and by Wohler's synthesis of urea, the fact
of isomerism waa firmly established. Compared with this great
conquest their joint work on mellitic acid (1880) and on sulpho-
vinic acid (1831) appears arnall; it sinks into insignificance when
viewed in the light of their immortal researches on bitter-almond
oil and on urio acid.


In 1832 bitter-almond oil was supposed to be to bitter almonds
what a hundred and one other essential oils are to their vegetable
sources. Of its chemistry nothing waa known except the tact that
it contains loosely combined prussic acid, and that, when kept for
a long time, it is liable to deposit a crystalline solid, as various
other essontial oils do. Liebig and Wohler, being struck by the
absence from even powdered bitter almonds of the intense smell
characteristic of the oil, set about tracing the latter to its origin,
and soon solved the question. In 1830 Robiquet and Boutron-
Char lard had succeeded in extracting from bitter almonds a ciyrtal-
line nitrogenous solid, soluble without decomposition in alcohol
and in water, which they called ainygdaline. What Liebig and
Wohler found waa that, when bitter-almond meal is mashed op
with water, this amygdaline, by the action of the water aid a
ferment (common to both aweet and bitter almonds), breaks np into
sugar, prussic acid, and bitter-almond oil. They also succeeded
in separating the prussic acid from the distilled oil, and found the
thus purified oil to be a non-poisonous liquid of the composition
CjH.O. This liquid, when exposed to the air, readily takes np
oxygen and assnmes the form of a solid, which is identical at ^»
aame time with the quasi-stearoptene of the oil and with Scheele's
benzoic acid, 0,11,0,. When treated with chlorine, the purifled oil
yields a chloride, 0,11,0.01,—the chlorine of which, by treatment
with the respective potassium compounds, is displaced by its
equivalent in bromine, iodine, sulphur, cyanogen, and, on treat,
ment with ammonia, by the group NHr Water converts it ints
hydrochloric and benzoic acids. In all these reactions the group
C,H,0 holds together; it moves forwards and backwards ss if it
were a compound element,—a common-place enough fact in the eyes
of the chemical student of 1882, but a most wonderful revelation
to the chemist of 1832. Berzelius, who certainly was not mnch
given to dealing in superlatives, greeted the discovery in hii
Jakrubcricht aa opening up a new era in organic chemistry, and,
rejecting the prosaic name of benzoyl which Wohler and Liebig
had given to their radical, proposed to name it proine, from rpvt,
early in the day, or orthrine, from tp$pct, the dawn.


Equally important in a scientific sense, but greater as a piece of
experimental work, waa their joint research on Uric Acid (a,
After their urio acid research the ways of Wohler and Lishif








diverged. The latter con tin nod to prosecute organic research; the*
former turned his attention, more to inorganic subjects,—not ex-
clusively, however, as the well-known research on narcotine (which
mi carried out in his laboratory, partly by himself partly by
Blyth, and published in 1848) is alone sufficient to prove.


Amongst Wbhlers inorganic publications, a short notice on the
improvements in the preparation of potassium is significant as
forming the small beginning of a brilliant series of researches' on
the isolation of elementary substances and on their properties, a
subioct for which he evidently had a great love, as he always comes
back to it in the intervals of other work. In 1827 he for the first
time succeeded in isolating aluminium, the metal of clay, by
means of a method which was soon found to be more generally
applicable. Alumina, like many other metallic oxides, is not
reducible by electrolysis or by the action of charcoal at any temper-
ature But, when heated with charcoal in ohlorine gas, it passes
into the state of a volatile chloride. What Wbhler found was that
this chloride, when heated with potassium or sodium, readily gives
up its ohlorine and assumes the elementary form. The aluminium
which Wohier thus obtained was a grey powder; but in 1845 he
succeeded in producing the metal in the Bhape of well-fused, fully
metallic globules. Wbhler, on this aecond occasion, correctly
ascertained all the properties which everybody now knows to be
characteristic of this metal; and it is as well to add that where
Wohler's aluminium differed from what now occurs in commerce
wider this xfame it differed to its own advantage. That Wohier
should not have seen the practical importance of his discovery is
not to be credited ; if he never suggested, an attempt to manu-
facture the metal industrially, that is only the natural consequence
of the circumstances in which he was placed.


The earlier aluminium research was followed in 1828 by the
isolation of beryllium and yttrium. These earlier metal reductions
fall into the Berlin period. While in Cassel he worked out pro-
cesses for the man fact are of nickel free from arsenic, and this laid
the foundation for what is now a flourishing chemical industry in
Germany. The several .methods for the analysis of nickel and
cobalt ores which ho describes in his Mineral-Analyse appear to
be an incidental outcome of this work. This subject was one of
his favourite topics; as late as 1877 we see him coming back to it
in the publication of a short process for the separation of nickel and
cobalt from arsenio and iron.


In 1849 metallic titanium arrested his attention. Since the
days of Wollaston those beautiful copper-like cubes which are
occasionally met with in blown-out blast furnaces had been sup-
posed to be metallic titanium pure and simple. Wohier observed
that the reputed metal, when fused with caustic alkali, emitted
torrents of ammonia, and on further inquiry ascertained the crystals
to be a ternary compound, containing the elements of a nitride and
of a cyanide of the metal. In pursuance of this research Wohier
taught us how to prepare real titanium and really pure titanic acid.


In 1854 Deville's energetio attempts to produce aluminium in-
dustrially caused Wohier to turn his attention again to this early
and almost forgotten child of his genius. His first incentive, no
doubt, was the natural and just desire to claim his right as the real
discoverer of what Deville, in his ignorance of foreign scientific
work, quite honestly thought he had been the first to find out.
This dispute came to a very satisfactory issue: Deville, after a
little pardonable hesitation, fully acknowledged Wohler's priority,
and the two henceforth were friends, and worked together.


The first fruit of this happy union was a memorable joint re-
search (published in 1856 ana 1867), which led to their discovery
of an adamantine and of a graphitoidal (in addition to the long
known amorphous) modification of boron. This graphitoidal
species subsequently, in their own hands, proved to be a mistake;
but the adamantine modification lives to this day as a true analogue
of ordinary (carbon) diamond.


From boron to silicon 1s an easy transition, so we need not
wonder at finding Wohier, in 1857, engaged (conjointly with the
physicist Buff) in a research on new compounds of silicon. On
electrolysing a solution of common salt with silicon-containing
aluminium as a positive electrode, they obtained a self-inflammable
gaa which they recognized as hydrogen contaminated with the
previously unknown hydride of silicon, SiH^ which body Wohier
subsequently, with the co-oporation of Martins, obtained in a state of
greater purity. Wohier and Buff also obtained, though in an
impure state, what were subsequently recognized by Fnedel and
Laoenburg as silicon-chloroform and as silicon-formic anhydride.


Space does not allow of more than a mere reference to Wohler's
researches on metallic or semimetallio nitrides. What we know
of this as yet little understood class of bodies, with barely an
exception, came out of his laboratory, if it was not done by himself
in the strict sense of the word. And only a reference can be
made to the numerous processes which Wohier, in the course of his
long laboratory practice, has worked out for the preparation of pure
chemicals, ana for the execution of exact analytical separations.
He had better work to do than to take up analytical problems
for their own sake; but what he did in this direction incidentally




amounts to a great deal. The analysis of meteorites was one of his
favourite specialties,—one of his results being the discovery of
organic matter in a meteorite which he examined in 1864.


As a teacher Wohier ranks with Liebig and Berzeliua. In a
sense he was the greatest of the three. Berzelins never had the
opportunity to teach large numbers of students in his laboratory;
and Liebig lacked the many-sidedness so characteristic of the Got-
tingen laboratory as long as it really was under Wbhler's personal
direction. One student might wish to work on organic chemistry,
another on minerals, a third on metallurgy, a fourth on rare ele-
ments; let them all go to Wbhler, and all, as well as the fifth or
sixth, would find themselves in the right place. That Wbhler in
these circumstances was able to do much literary work is truly
marvellous. His Grundrisa der Chemie, which he published anony.
raously at first, has passed through many editions, and been trans-
lated into various foreign languages,—never, unfortunately, into
English. A more valuable teaching book still, and more unique in
its character, is his excellent Practixhe Uebungen in der chemiechen
Analyse (entitled in the second edition Mineral-Analyse in Sei-
epielen), of which we have two English translations. To a man
like him the compilation of either book probably gave little
trouble; what must have taken up a very large portion of his
valuable,time are his translations of Berzelius s Lehrbuch der Chcv\ie,
and of all the successive volumes of Berzelius's JakrttbericM, which
only thus became really available to the scientific world at large.
From 1838, too, Wbhler was one of the editors of Liebig's Annalen.


Wohler's last publication (1880) treats of a new kind of galvanic
element in which the one metal aluminium serves for either pole.


A very excellent biography of WBhler by Hofmann ts published In the Berichte
der deuttcJun cfumitchen GetelUchafl for 1862. (W. D.)

